In order to get startups and entrepreneurs thinking about the most effective ways to pitch their businesses, Adeo Ressi of Founder Institute has been encouraging his founders to boil their mission statements down to one sentence, using a simple formula. George Zachary of Charles River Ventures asked Ressi to come up with a format for startup pitches, because he has been hearing so many different people pitching in umpteen different ways. Tech bloggers, investors, partners, founders, and many in between are intimately familiar with this: The seemingly infinite permutations entrepreneurs have devised for their pitches. Some work, and many don’t. Robin’s post yesterday covered Ressi’s formula in detail, and he even encouraged entrepreneurs to send us their one sentence pitches. And that they have. (More to come on that.) Now, I happen to agree with both Adeo and Robin: Whittling pitches down to a bite-sized chunks can be a great exercise for founders. Entrepreneurs, whether first-timers or not, can always stand to improve the ways in which they describe their company. Time is money, and the more quickly and effectively you can pitch your business, the better your chances of grabbing the attention of investors, bloggers, partners, etc. Of course, one sentence pitches should be an exercise to get you articulating what your business really does well — better than everyone else — but not the end game. One sentence descriptions can result in vagueness, hyperbole, and buzzword orgies.  Encouraging more effective expression in mission statements is a good thing, but spewing forth a string of meaningless signifiers and buzzwords? Nope. That will just cause us to go on screensaver, or call security. There’s a fine line. Grooveshark for hugs? Stop it. So, here we have the flip side of the coin, the devil’s advocate — some terrific examples of what can happen when the one-sentence pitch goes too far. Stay away from these, and you’re off on the right foot. For starters, there’s Now That’s What I Call Startups, developed by Reuben Pressman and Hunter Payne to assist founders in eliminating the “low hanging fruit” during the ideating process. Does your pitch sound eerily similar? Then it might be time to consider a pivot.  Now That’s What I Call Startups joins other startup generators, like It’s This For That, which highlights the annoyingly familiar habit (of which we’re all guilty) of drawing crappy ad hoc analogies when describing startups. It’s the “Airbnb for X” problem. The analogy can work, but only sparingly, and it better be extremely accurate. For good measure, there’s also Startup Idea Generator, and Smore’s awesome Y Combinator parody, Y Kombinator, which generates landing pages for startups that are obviously immune from the deadpool. Or, perhaps you’re a coder who happens to be short on ideas, in which case you should check out Justin Windle’s hilarious mashup for technical projects created using the WTF Engine. So, put on a pot of tea, and get coding. Refining your pitch until it sings is an essential process, and some of these sites will no doubt help to get your juices flowing. But for the love of all that’s holy, be careful. You don’t want to become these guys. (We’re looking at you, product people.) Courtesy of FI, here are some actual pitch resources for startups. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Contributor Ashkan Karbasfrooshan is the founder and CEO of WatchMojo.  Follow him @ashkan. Company founders are the quintessential cheerleaders, promoting their vision and company every chance they get.  But that doesn’t mean that they are necessarily the best at two core functions: selling and fundraising (and many are bad at both but excel at other functions, like technology). While generating revenue and raising capital require a lot of the same traits, in my experience those who are good at one tend to be poor at the other. Always Be Closing: Coffee is for Closers Some salespeople are driven by money, others less so – but all are driven to close the deal.  The more deals we secure, the better, and if in the process we generate more revenue for our organization and ourselves, then great. Most salespeople will tell you that selling is an art.  But negotiating to sell software or advertising (or any product or service, for that matter) is very different than trying to secure funding.  In fact, I’ve learned if you’re really successful at sales then you’re almost doomed at fundraising. What does it take to be a great salesman? Ultimately, selling a good or service requires that 1-    you hustle; 2-    you always follow up; 3-    you don’t take no for an answer; 4-    you offer more and more value until you close the deal. When I was studying finance to pursue a career in investment banking, I was working in customer service for a large bank.  Repeatedly I was told that I would make a great salesman, which to a young finance grad was as complimentary as telling a woman she is handsome.  Eventually I landed at a nascent online publisher and ended up in ad sales and sold a lot of ad deals despite the worst ad market since the Great Depression.  The publisher in question has now evolved as a must-buy for most media buyers, but at the time it was a fairly unknown brand deemed way too racy for most mainstream marketers.  I wasn’t driven by money, but I was good at selling… so until I figured out what I wanted to do next, I kept selling (and writing). After that company was acquired, I cashed in my shares and left my sales job to start WatchMojo, where despite having the ability to bootstrap and self-finance the company I sought to raise capital because I wanted to build a really big company, fast, and because I felt that it would give me street cred, but, I was remarkably bad.  I don’t think I was that bad, but the result (or lack thereof spoke for itself). To be fair, maybe I was bad at fundraising because: a)     I didn’t have to raise capital, knowing I could rely on the proceeds of the sale and my sales commissions, so I wasn’t desperate enough to accept draconian clauses; b)     I started a content company and investors are generally adverse to content; c)     My company was based in Montreal, d)     Me just doing a bad job of it. In all honesty it was likely all of the above.  In any case, throughout the journey, I learned that selling a good or service is nothing like selling your stock. What does it take to be a great fundraiser? It occurred to me that as good as I was at selling (though I had no desire to be a salesman again per se), fundraising required a different set of skills and techniques.  You have to: I-              Play hard to get, “be a challenge” and pretend that you’re just not all that into the other party; II-            Create the illusion that the “train is about to leave the station” unless an investor signs on; III-          Be disciplined and go through periods of time without following up with the interested investor, because the saying “absence makes the heart grow fonder” applies here, too. IV-           Ultimately, be less than sincere.  Push someone to table the term sheet to shop it around, even if you have no intention of honoring it. These are fundamentally different traits and behaviors than when you are selling a good or service. Scarcity The main difference between selling and fundraising is the outcome: unless you’re selling a unique asset like real estate, when you sell someone something, you are not precluded to working with others or selling the same good to someone else: you can keep selling the same asset over-and-over again. In advertising, even if you sell someone an ad spot, you can sell the same spot to someone else on another day, or better yet: create a new ad unit. In fundraising, once you close a deal, you are technically married to the investor, for better or worse. Why are the greatest salespeople doomed at fundraising? Ultimately, a great salesperson will be able to unearth revenue, and keep the lights on. They say the best form of equity is sales. Perhaps, but if that’s the only route you take, you might end up selling yourself short. I’m not saying that some people aren’t born to do both well, many people are.  But if you have been good at one and think you will naturally be good at the other, think again—there’s a good chance that the skills required in one aspect of business is fundamentally different than those required for the other. Photo credit: Nicolay Stanev/Shutterstock Latest headlines delivered to you daily AngelPad, the startup incubator launched by seven ex-Googlers in August 2010, is taking a look back at how far it’s come in the months since and the lessons they’ve learned along the way. So far, AngelPad has helped 37 companies get off the ground, but it wasn’t until this year that things really got going: 29 of those 37 startups emerged from AngelPad’s incubator in 2011 alone. Out of the 37 companies, 31 have received funding, totaling just over $25 million. According to one of AngelPad’s founders, Thomas Korte, the average funding amount for its startups is around $750,000. Of course, he admits that averages don’t always give the most accurate picture since a few highs and lows can distort things. MoPub, for example, is on the high-end, having raised over $7 million. There were a couple of others with high numbers over a million, too, Korte says. But the vast majority of the startups have raised somewhere in the $500K – $1 million range, and 10 AngelPad companies have raised over $1 million each in 2011. Also, among a handful of acquisition offers, only one took the bait: Hopscotch sold to Sosh. However, both companies were so young, it was really more of a teaming up on their parts. Not all companies make it, though. AngelPad has seen three companies fail out of the 37 launched – something that Korte says was not due to lack of funding or traction. “In early stage startups, the number one reason for failure is the founder relationship, he explains, “all three failed because of a founder breakup.” He says the program now looks at the founders applying to see how long they’ve known each other, if they’ve worked together and what sort of issues they’ve overcome in the past. There are few other insights the AngelPad team gained over the past year and half of operation. One is that founders need to have an extremely large vision. “And not an artificially inflated vision, but truly a great vision of what you want to do,” says Korte. “That’s when a lot of investors, and people who want to work for you, and even advisors, get excited about your company.” But a vision alone is not enough. You also have to have the first tangible steps. Korte says he often sees startups with the tangible steps and a smaller vision, or people with a huge vision, and no tangible steps as to how to achieve it. You have to have both those things together. He also stressed that growing a company takes time. It seems an obvious point, but in today’s instant gratification age (and corresponding news cycle, ahem), what’s often not reported is how long it took for a company to achieve its success, funding, or whatever other metric is being touted. “We don’t see how much work or how much time has gone into it – we don’t see how many iterations it took, how many years it took, how long it’s being going on,” says Korte. And it’s a problem that’s affecting everyone. “Investors become impatient, founders become impatient, employees become impatient…but building great companies takes time.” Finally, Korte says that AngelPad learned that even a small amount of money early on can have a big impact on how founders approach the product. It takes the pressure of raising money off founders’ shoulders, allowing them to focus not on impressing VC’s with what’s being built, but more on building the product itself. Of course, AngelPad knows this impact first-hand: this summer, two VC firms ponied up $50K each, providing each startup with an additional $100K – something that will continue in the new year. As for what’s next for 2012? With any hope, it’s more of the same. The incubator plans to start interviewing companies in January for the session starting in March. Applications are closing on January 1st, so if you’re a startup thinking of applying, time is almost up. Get busy. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Thirty-six hours ago, the recently founded software development firm Wappwolf launched Dropbox Automator, which is sort of like an IFTTT for Dropbox. IFTTT, for those of you not up to speed on the latest Internet trends (where have you been?!), is a pretty amazing online tool that automates tasks to trigger when a particular action has occurred. For example: when my Facebook profile picture changes, update my Twitter profile pic too; email me when Amazon posts its free Android app of the day; text me when a get a new email; etc. Like IFTTT, Dropbox Automator is capable of triggering a similar series of actions, based on what kind of files have been added to your Dropbox folders. In IFTTT, these actions are called “Recipes,” but in Dropbox Automator, they’re called “automations.” Not only are they trigged by file type (e.g. a photo, a .doc, a PDF, etc.), they’re also triggered based on which Dropbox folder the file has been placed into. For documents, you can choose from actions like convert to PDF, convert PDF to text, summarize, translate, upload to Google Docs, upload to Slideshare and more. Photos can be uploaded to Facebook, Flickr, rotated, annotated with text, a map or a logo, have effects applied, and downscaled. Any file can be emailed, zipped, renamed, FTP’d, encrypted or decrypted, saved to another Dropbox, tweeted, or set as a Facebook status. The only problem I had with the service is that the results were not immediate, as I expected. It took a good ten minutes for photos to show up on Flickr, for example. The speed of other actions may vary based on the processing speed required and the current server load. (The company says its new and improved server engine will be ready next week.) If speed is of a concern, then this service is not ideal…at least not in its present form. But if you’re simply automating stuff that you don’t want to forget to do later on (e.g. put photos on Flickr, upload to Google Docs), then Dropbox Automator could be quite the useful tool. Since its launch barely two days ago, the company has signed up 1,500 users on the platform. Given Dropbox’s popularity and the loyal, nerdy following of IFTTT, my guess is they’re about to get a bunch more. You can try out Dropbox Auotmator for yourself from here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Photo organization service (and TechCrunch Disrupt finalist) Everpix has just launched into public beta, bringing with it a number of changes to its backend infrastructure, web interface and its desktop software. The service, for those unaware, automatically organizes and combines all your photos, whether they’re stored on your computer or in the cloud. It then combines them into an online photo gallery where groups of photos are laid out into attractive albums called “Moments.” The service currently supports only Mac computers (iPhoto, Aperture, Lightroom), but plans to support Windows in the future. It also gathers photos from your online collections on Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Flickr, Picasa and can even locate photos found in your email.  Once connected,  Everpix uses a feature called “assistive curating” to create “Moments,” which are similar to iPhoto’s “Events,” but are built for you automatically. You can see an Apple-like design aesthetic here, which is not surprising given that two of Everpix’s Co-founders, Pierre-Olivier Latour and Kevin Quennesson, each spent several years with the company. Meanwhile, the third Co-founder, Wayne Fan, was previously at frog design. Within these “Moments,” Everpix automatically detects bad photos, like those that are blurry, out of focus or under or overexposed and hides them from view. You can also share photos or albums using a simple one-click setting. Since exiting its alpha, Everpix made a number of changes and improvements. It has increased its performance and handles your imported photos better than before. The company says that it improved color accuracy, timestamp detection, and the preview and thumbnail quality of the photos, among other things. It also automatically reconciles duplicates on import and merges the corresponding metadata. The Mac uploader software has been updated, too, with more options, partial support for Picasa Mac (hooray!) and more. However, the most exciting news is that the Everpix iOS application is almost here. (It’s in the review queue at Apple right now). When launched, this app will automatically mirror your entire Everpix photo collection to your iOS device, while also supporting social sharing and offline access to photos. In the future, support for photo uploads is planned as well. You can sign up for the Everpix public beta here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Say what you will about YouTube’s affinity for cats or their audience’s collective inability to write insightful comments, but there’s one thing that YouTube really just doesn’t get enough credit for: saving the music video. As MTV losts its original love in favor of  Nick Cannon Presents: Whacky Garbage Nonsense and re-runs of America’s Next Quickly Forgotten Reality Show Person, music videos went without a proper home for nearly a decade. Then came YouTube. The only bad part about watching music videos on YouTube? Everything else on YouTube. The soul-crushing comments; the gawdy artist backgrounds; the endless recommendations. That’s where Tubalr comes in. It’s YouTube’s glorious music video collection, minus all of that darn YouTube. Looking past the fact that Tubalr has a downright ridiculous name (is that supposed to be tubular? Tuba Lore? Two-baller? No idea), it’s quite great. You punch in an artist name, then pick either “only” (to play only that artist’s videos) or “similar” (to play videos from similar artists.) It queues up a big playlist, and you can go about your business as the tunes play on. Think Pandora’s concept, mashed up with Youtube’s music video archive. The search algorithm still needs a bit of tuning (a search for “Reel Big Fish” built a playlist of nineteen music videos… and one clip called “Jessica the Hippo”, which was three minutes of an older gentleman talking to a hippo at a zoo.) but this is definitely something I expect to have running on one of my monitors throughout the day. Check it out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gazelle Lab, the brand-new Tampa Bay-based TechStars Network member which just held its first Demo Day in November, is expanding its operations. The accelerator has just announced the opening of second location in Orlando, Florida, where it will be working with local academic institution Rollins College. The Orlando team will be led by founder Richard Licursi, CEO of Florida’s Spectrum Bridge, Inc. You may remember hearing about that company as being the first to win the FCC’s approval to manage a database in the newly-opened “white space” spectrum. Licursi will be responsible for leading the fundraising for the Orlando crew, along with three other founders and support from the original St. Petersburg team. In addition to Lucursi, Orlando’s Gazelle Lab founders include Allen Kupetz, Executive-in-Residence, Crummer Graduate School, Rollins College; Pete McAlindon, Ph.D., CEO of Blue Orb, Inc.; and Pat McNair, CPA, Interim CFO, at RowShamBow. This is only the second TechStars member to open an additional location. TechStars proper, of course, has multiple locations across the U.S. while network member Startup Bootcamp is live in a few cities in Europe. As to why there’s a need for more locations so early into the group’s founding, Gazelle Lab founder Daniel James Scott explains that the team feels that the region deserves a statewide effort. “One of the biggest lessons we had during the first cadre of Gazelle Lab is that if we are going to accomplish our missions of building community and a true seed-stage funding pipeline, these would have to start happening at the state level,” he says. Scott says there’s been demand for even more Gazelle Lab-branded programs across the state, but Orlando had the right mix of founders, investors and partners that Gazelle could plug its support, mentors and application pipeline into. With this announcement, the group is hoping to tie together all of central Florida into a cohesive early-stage funding scene, while tapping into the talent from area universities like Rollins, USF, and others. Florida entrepreneurs are invited to apply to program via the Gazelle Lab website. The group is also supporting the new acelerato.rs application system, which lets you send in your application to multiple accelerator programs at once. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just.me, a stealth startup incubated by Palo Alto, California-based Archimedes Labs has raised $2.7 million in Series A funding according to an SEC filing. The company earlier secured $600,000 in seed financing from SV Angel, Google Ventures, True Ventures, Betaworks, CrunchFund and a couple of other high-profile investors such as Don Dodge and Michael Parekh. I reached out to Keith Teare, CEO and sole founder of just.me (and also technically also a co-founder of TechCrunch, for full disclosure), but he politely declined to comment on the funding round.  Sources close to the company, however, were kind enough to inform us that the Series A round was led by a new investor, namely Khosla Ventures, and that True Ventures also participated again. Teare tells me he’ll have more to share about the company’s vision when just.me gears up for public launch, which should occur in March 2012. From what I’ve gathered so far, the company is building a ‘new type of social network’ that lives on your smartphone and the cloud and can be accessed from your desktop browser, rather than the other way around (e.g. what Facebook does). Basically, it sounds like just.me wants to turn your phone into the post-PC centerpiece of your social graph, and not just a tool to gain access to it. More once we learn more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Facebook has AppData, Twitter has Twitaholic, and now Google+ has its own independent brand page rankings site: ZoomSphere. It shows which brands have the most followers, activity, +1s, shares, and comments, and slice the data by time, page category, and country. Oddly, the site doesn’t rank user profiles like SocialStatistics does — just brand pages. Still, by augmenting its existing charts for Facebook and Twitter, ZoomSphere could become a comprehensive resource for brands charting their own performance, assessing competitors, or scoping for potential partners. So who’s winning six weeks after Google+ launched brand pages? Mostly news outlets, bands, and technology companies. Considering that Google+ is notorious for Google fanboys, it’s little surprise that Android tops the international follower charts, and 6 Google properties reside in the top 25. Mashable, The New York Times, Breaking News, and TechCrunch are all in the top 20. The most popular bands reveal a slightly more mature demographic on Google+, with older acts like Coldplay, Train, and Pearl Jam ranking significantly higher than on Facebook or Twitter.  No brands have come close to reaching 1 million followers, while only 3 individuals — Britney Spears, Larry Page, and Snoop Dogg — have accomplished the feat. This shows that mainstream users who casually subscribe to lots of their favorite brands and celebrities haven’t joined Google+’s 63 million registered users yet. Instead, avid technologists and news readers courted by the social network’s invite-only launch seem to make up its core user base. One myth that could be dispelled by ZoomSphere’s charts? That there are no women on Google+. High rankings for country duo Sugarland, Burberry, and H&M which claims the #4 spot seem to suggest otherwise. In terms of features and feel, ZoomSphere offers a solid product. Charts and graphs look polished, its easy to compare different pages, and the option to view by country reveals some interesting demographic distinctions. For example, Dell ranks #17 worldwide, but as #2 in the UK, showing Apple’s rise might not be so swift in Britain. Some features that could improve ZoomSphere would be Google+ user profile charts, and the ability to view a single brand across its Facebook, Twitter, and Google+ presences. Established market research providers have been slow to launch Google+ brand charts, giving ZoomSphere an opportunity to become the go-to source for this data. Now it just needs Google to improve these pages so more brands actually want them. Here’s the complete top 20 chart of Google+ brand pages by follower count as of 12/28/2011:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In many ways, 2011 was the year of the pivot. One startup that successfully switched gears was Fab, which started the year as a gay social network and ended it a design-oriented e-commerce site. Founder Jason Goldberg created the Fab Timeline slideshow  below to illustrate all the changes the company has gone through, from its pivot in February to raising $8 million in July, another $40 million in early December, and growing all along the way. But one slide in particular caught my eye. It shows Fab’s order growth shooting up from just above 20,000 orders in July to about 40,000 in September and then jumping to nearly 100,000 in November.  Orders in december continues to climb, Goldberg tells me, and the company is on an annualized revenue-run-rate of almost $70 million.  Of course, that is annualized based on December, which is the best month of the year for retail. But that implies Fab will do almost $6 million in revenue this month alone. A lot of people were introduced to Fab this holiday season, and if they like what they got they will return next year to shop some more. Fab’s ambition is to become the “Amazon.com for design.” Its investors are betting that it can get there and turn that 100,000 orders a month into a million orders a month and more.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Groupon has continued its (talent) acquisition spree with the recent purchase of a hot Silicon Valley startup before they even launched – and with extremely little fanfare. We’ve learned that Campfire Labs, which was founded by ex-Googler Sakina Arsiwala (previously Head of International at YouTube) and her husband, social search technology expert Naveen Koorakula (previously at search companies like Inktomi, Yahoo and Picch), was quietly bought by Groupon. I noticed something was up when ownership of the domain name campfirelabs.com was transferred to Groupon earlier this week – it currently forwards to their site (as long as you leave out the ‘www’). There’s no good reason for Groupon to gain ownership over the company’s domain name and forward it to their own website, other than Campfire Labs was acquired by them. From what I can gather, Campfire Labs was working on a social networking service, trying to improve the way people engage, collaborate and converse with others online. Admittedly that’s quite vague, and this recent job description makes us none the wiser: We’re an early stage seed-funded startup that wants to change the way people think of social interactions in the real world and online. We are committed to building an intellectually stimulating and fun environment, where technology and product excellence are respected above all. We pride ourselves in having an open culture of equals. We have a cozy office in downtown San Francisco with a red couch and a well-stocked kitchen. We are tackling very complex algorithmic, technology and product problems. We’re building systems designed to scale. Some tools in our toolkit – javascript (node.js, javascript mvc), hypertable, hadoop, C++ and Ruby. We like unit testing, continuous integration and contributing to open source. Vivek Wadhwa mentioned the startup in a post about entrepreneurship back in July 2010. We’ve reached out to Groupon and some people at Campfire Labs, and are still waiting on an official confirmation. But we’ve confirmed the deal through unofficial channels. According to the company’s website – at least, the Google-cached version of it – Campfire Labs investors and advisors included SV Angel’s Ron Conway and David Lee, YouTube co-founder Steve Chen, the late Stanford professor Rajeev Motwani, former Facebook and YouTube CFO Gideon Yu, former eBay SVP Michael Dearing, Felicis Ventures founder and MD Aydin Senkut, Splash CEO Michael Powers, Asha Jadeja and Vuclip CEO Nickhil Jakatdar. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For a young startup, sometimes you want any funding you can get. For an incubator program, sometimes any startup is what you’re looking for. Finding each other won’t necessarily make either one successful, but more pairings might help overall. Or so believes TechStars, which is launching what it intends to be the Common Application of the startup world. Called Accelerato.rs, the application is a standard online form that asks founders basic investor-type questions, and lets them write one version then send it to any of the dozen or so participating programs. Funded by the entrepreneurship-focused Kauffman Foundation and under development since earlier this year, Accelerato.rs also lets startups track their acceptance status for each of the programs that they apply to. “One of the big things that a lot of the accelerators are looking for are more applications,” TechStars cofounder David Cohen tells me. ” Y Combinator, Seedcamp, TechStars and some of the other big accelerators are getting thousands of applications but only accepting a few percentage points.” The foundation will also be studying how participating startups do to better understand what makes accelerators successful. Towards that effort, TechStars is also providing a simple tool for aggregating and presenting data about accelerator track records. The way it works is that each accelerator first has its companies create CrunchBase company profiles for themselves (which they should be doing anyway), then the accelerator provides TechStars with a file containing basic information about each company and links to the profiles. TechStars then creates a data table for them that they can publish to their sites (directions here). The immediate goal of this data is to help programs better show off the value they have created to prospective companies, which is part of the larger goal of making the whole process as simple as possible for entrepreneurs. TechStars already has its own stats available on its home site, and they show that 80% of its 92 post-acceleration companies are active because they’re profitable or venture-backed, while eight have been acquired and another eight have failed. Note: A recent TechCrunch guest post compared TechStars and Y Combinator results using CrunchBase data, but slightly undercounted TechStars because not all TechStars companies had marked the program as an investor in their profiles — make sure to fill out those out completely, everybody.  Unlike the Common Application for US universities, which is a fully neutral membership organization, there’s also a bit of a branding play for TechStars going on here. The Accelorato.rs site is set up to have a neutral image, but TechStars handles the operations, and the participating companies come from its TechStars Network, other programs that TechStars has reviewed to confirm they’re funding and mentoring startups. The site isn’t necessarily restricted to that group. “Any seed accelerator can use it,” Cohen responded when I told him that the program felt weighted towards his organization: the application can be fully embedded on other accelerators’ sites, and TechStars guarantees that it doesn’t access data about other programs. Seedcamp has its own form at present, and so does the original seed-stage fund, Y Combinator (whose set of questions are especially customized to its overall hacker theme). Think of them as the elite universities that make college applicants fill out their own special sets of questions, tailored to their own academic missions. The Accelerato.rs questions are plain-vanilla, although participating companies can alter them as much as they feel like. Some samples: – “Describe your startup in 140 characters or less.” – “Explain how the company will make money.” – “What are some things that the team (or its members) have built in the past? Please include URLs.” Of course, many people who want to start a company won’t need to go through any program to get the funding, mentorship and network they need. And many of the top startups who do want the accelerator experience will get into the top programs. This application might help bet more candidates in the door, but accelerators are going to have to still figure out their value add to recruit the types of founders who will make them money. But still, what’s the worst case scenario if accelerato.rs helps more startups get more investment? That some rich people lose a little money they knew they were risking anyway, to help other people with ideas get some real-world experience? In my view, just trying something is a huge, under-appreciated benefit would-be founders will get out of any accelerator. My Y Combinator startup didn’t work out, but Paul Graham introduced me to Matt Marshall at VentureBeat, and that ended up turning into a writing job and eventually another startup that did work out (meanwhile one of my cofounders, Phil Kast, ended up working at a successful YC company, Auctomatic). Having to go through the application process and really flesh out our plans, then go through the intense process of building and launching to the public in the program, were more valuable for me than much of what I learned in college. Latest headlines delivered to you daily While bookstores are reporting increased sales this month, I foresee a time when “Staff Picks” at the local booke shoppe will soon be replaced by recommendation engines that tell you what ebook to pick up next.  Services like Amazon’s own recommendation engine and smaller guys like Booklamp all promise to let you know what tome to crack after you finish the Stephen King epic but GoodReads adds a bit of value-add to the burgeoning self-publishing movement. The service lets authors create their own author pages and fans can follow and interact with writers in the comments and on private author blogs. You can also rate fifteen books to begin getting recommendations for future reading. Authors can run private blogs, send out giveaways, and publicize events using the service. The service has recommended 6 million books to 6.5 million users and there are currently 240 million books in the database. They are adding 14 million books a month. The team has doubled this year from 10 to 20 people (and they’re hiring). “We’re profitable,” wrote Otis Chandler in an email. “We think we have the best book recommendations on the internet right now (yes, better than Amazon) and we launched our recommendations in September after having acquired a company (Discovereads) in March to power them – and the results have been phenomenal.” In the end services like GoodReads and good old word of mouth will power the publishing industry. If I can market my own books – for free or for a price – and sell them to eager customers, I’m much more likely to self publish and, although this will be decreasingly likely, work with a publisher. The old model of publishing was the movement of widgets, by truck, from warehouse to store to consumer. The new model is one-to-one and sites like GoodReads are powering this revolution. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In the small but budding legal medical marijuana industry, WeedMaps has the munchies for acquisitions (sorry, I couldn’t resist). Fresh off its $4.2 million Marijuana.com bong hit in November, WeedMaps’ parent company, Canada’s General Cannabis, announced today its acquisition MMJMenu. Terms were not disclosed. It was an asset-sale, though, so it probably wasn’t much. General Cannabis, which is publicly traded over the counter in Canada (OTCBB: CANA), (OTCQX: CANA), reported $10.4 million in revenues for the first nine months of 2011, and it only had $1.4 million in cash. WeedMaps accounts for 82 percent of its revenues. MMJMenu provides back-end enterprise software for medical marijuana dispensaries. The software handles everything from patient management to inventory control to checkout at point of sale. Medical marijuana dispensaries are highly regulated. Emblazoned on MMJMenu’s homepage is its key selling point: mmjmenu is the best choice for medical marijuana business owners that want to stay compliant with state laws & regulations. WeedMaps is the “Yelp for medical marijuana dispensaries.” Now it will be able to offer these businesses enterprise software as well as advertising services. MMJMenu claims “hundreds” of medical marijuana business customers “in California, Colorado, Michigan, Montana, Washington as well as in Canada.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily In what looks like a firesale, Call Genie has acquired US-based mobile analytics and advertising network company VoodooVox, which has raised a ton of venture capital from investors like Apax Partners, Softbank Capital, Steamboat Ventures (Disney), Berkshire Capital Investors and Village Ventures. VoodooVox provides demographic information on phone calls and mobile ad traffic in real-time, enabling companies to gain insights into their call volume and mobile application activity. Call Genie, which is listed on the Toronto Stock Exchange, says it acquired the company to expand its product offering and move deeper into the mobile advertising market. Under the terms of the agreement, Call Genie will issue 11.25 million shares to VoodooVox shareholders, as well as pay an additional $1.8 million in cash over an unspecified period of time. VoodooVox CEO J. Scott Hamilton in a statement says the company has amassed roughly 300 million phone records of individuals and companies alike. He continues: “We have paid particular attention to mobile phone numbers, and believe we have created the reference data source for rich demographic information on cell phone numbers.  Through our library of APIs, this information source can be easily integrated into carrier platforms and mobile ad serving networks”. The transaction should be completed in January 2012. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post was written by Dave Chase, the CEO of Avado.com, a patient portal & relationship management company that was a TechCrunch Disrupt finalist. Previously he was a management consultant for Accenture’s healthcare practice and founder of Microsoft’s Health business. You can follow him on Twitter@chasedave. In several of my past pieces, I have written about the importance of a disruptive model of care and payment called Direct Primary Care (DPC) such as The Most Important Organization In Silicon Valley That No One Has Heard About. As the DPC models scale, they become a great option for individuals and small business. However, larger organizations have another option at their disposal that I’m as excited about as the DPC models. Employers fed up with the annual “get less for more” health story when they get annual health plan updates have taken matters into their own hands. This has created one of the hottest sectors of the economy — onsite clinic providers. These are companies providing corporations with primary care onsite at employer workplaces. Each of the onsite clinic provider CEOs (e.g., Concentra, CareHere) I have spoken with have shared that their business is growing 100% annually. Reportedly 20% of employers with over 500 employees are implementing onsite clinic programs. Faced with healthcare’s hyperinflation which is hurting their competitiveness, employers have been trying an array of solutions. Led by IBM’s study of their $2 billion annual health expenditure, the overwhelming evidence comes to a surprisingly simple conclusion: more primary care = healthier population = less money spent. Ben Franklin was right. An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Time and again, it’s been shown that proactive primary care can reduce the most expensive downstream healthcare costs — surgeries, scans, emergency department and specialist visits — by 40-80%. Rather than waiting for small issues to become full-blown medical incidents, proactive primary care can make a big difference. These disruptive onsite clinics are proving that employers don’t have to endure the “get less for more” program anymore. Larger employers are finding onsite clinics have the same cost and health benefits as DPC models, but it goes beyond just direct costs. The good news for startups is the onsite clinic providers aren’t entrenched with old technology and almost comically convoluted and interminable decision processes at traditional healthcare providers that have prevented innovative technologies from gaining a toehold. Where do the savings come from? In the U.S., we tackle healthcare in a way that would be the equivalent of having the best firefighters and firefighting equipment in the world and then paying them more if there were more fires. Thus, you might find firefighters implicitly encouraging kids to play with fireworks on dry hillsides and allow buildings to be built with only one exit and no sprinklers. Even today, many hospitals measure their occupancy like a hotel. That is, higher occupancy is perceived positively similar to the fictional firefighter hoping for more fires so they get paid more. Instead, the key to slaying the healthcare cost beast is to view expensive interventions such as hospitalizations (other than child-birth) as a failure rather than something to be optimized. In the “do more, bill more” model we’ve been afflicted with, we get exactly what we reward. That is, full-blown medical conflagrations that are lucrative for healthcare providers but devastating to healthcare budgets that we all ultimately pay for directly or indirectly. One other benefit employers realize with onsite clinics is that their employees aren’t wasting half a day going to a doctor’s appointment. Not only is the clinic nearby, but the need to even go to the clinic is reduced. In the flawed fee-for-service model, a doctor can only be paid if you visit their clinic. Not surprisingly, many doctors will optimize for the patient to come to their office as frequently as possible as it allows for more billing events. In contrast, DPC and onsite primary care physicians share the fact that as much as 2/3 of clinic visits don’t require a face-to-face encounter. Rather, phone or electronic communication is sufficient. For example, one doctor shared how he hasn’t seen a patient with Shingles in 5 years. These patients simply take a photo with their camera phone, email it to him and he can easily tell it is Shingles. He can then call in a prescription saving everyone time and money. Fortunately, onsite clinic providers aren’t incentivized by convoluted health reimbursement models that reward the most expensive care possible. Both DPC and onsite clinic models are rewarded for value and outcomes, rather than mere activity. Further, the smartest of these recognize who the most important member of the care team is — the individual. After all, the individual is the only person who goes to 100% of their appointments and the 99+% of their life spent away from the clinic is when they return to or maintain their health. Having implemented HealthIT systems in dozens of health systems, it’s evident from a systems perspective that the patient is treated as a vessel to attach billing codes to rather than an equal member of the care team. It should be no surprise that legacy HealthIT is optimized around the flawed model, rather than the new models. Entire new categories of software emerge as healthcare providers recognize the most important member of the care team has largely been ignored. The organizations that treat the individual as a member of the care team practice a “Collaborative Care” model that is making a real dent in healthcare costs. For the more difficult issues such as obesity and substance abuse, the Collaborative Care model extends to other care providers. In other words, not only is the patient-provider connection important but the provider-provider connection is also critical.  For example, after a few years of trying various approaches, a large media company’s onsite provider assigned health coaches to their employees and had rewards and penalties for following care plans. The coaches coordinate between the primary care physician (who is also rewarded for individuals sticking to care plans) and the individual to great effect. There’s the dual win of a healthier employee and less money spent. Emerging technology solutions are making this much easier so the entire care team (individual, coach and doctor) are in sync to achieve the health goal. The most successful onsite providers are rewarded for being patient-centered, accountable and coordinated. In contrast, the flawed “do more, bill more” reimbursement model that is still pervasive implicitly rewards a provider-centric, unaccountable (e.g., it’s good news when a sick patient comes back more frequently) and uncoordinated model. For traditional healthcare providers, they should heed the warning that providers are making newspaper industry mistakes. As more employers learn of the great benefits from a well-executed onsite clinic model, they will continue this Do it Yourself Health Reform trend that is happening one employer at a time. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Banjo, the creepy/awesome cyber-stalking app (I mean social discovery service) that shows you who’s nearby based on their Facebook and Foursquare check-ins, geotagged tweets, TwitPic and Instagram uploads, is now a web app, too. In case you haven’t yet download the iOS or Android application to your mobile device (or are some kind of Windows Phone-using rebel), you can check out the service via the recently updated Banjo website instead. To use the online version, you just type in any city or zip code to explore what people are saying and doing there in real-time. And if you’re using a modern browser that supports geolocation, you can also use the online service to see those who are near your current location. The website is designed replicate the native mobile experience as closely as possible – and sure enough, it looks like a big ol’ iPhone app right there on the screen.  According to Banjo Co-founder Damien Patton, the app’s adoption has surpassed the team’s expectations. They were aiming to reach 400,000 downloads by year-end, but ended up achieving the 500,000 downloads milestone before the year was out, six months post-launch. (Note: that’s iOS/Android combined downloads). Patton adds that the company has also seen over 1 million friend alerts in its first month as well, referring to the newer feature that pings you if friends you’re connected to on social networks are nearby. Banjo is live in over 175 countries, which is why the company is now focusing on adding support for additional languages. It recently added Spanish, and has just added Turkish and Italian to the Android app, too, with the iPhone to follow in January. There has been an explosion of these “social discovery” apps this year, many of which leverage existing social networks in an effort to connect you with those around you. In Banjo’s case, its closest competitors are apps like Sonar, ntro and Mingle, which are more focused on introductions and networking than Banjo is. You can check out the newly web-ified version of Banjo here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Contributor Kai Lukoff is based in Beijing and is co-founder of the startup blog TechRice. Twenty years ago, Zhongguancun was but farming fields and small houses, far from the city center of Beijing. The ‘cun’ at the end of Zhongguancun literally means “village.” As with much else in China, the change has come lightening fast. Today, Zhongguancun is China’s closest equivalent to Silicon Valley. It’s host to electronics super malls, research centers, publicly-listed tech giants, and hundreds of startups. During my walk to work between twenty-story office towers, it’s hard to imagine this land was farmed but one short generation ago. Here are three reasons why Zhongguancun (or the larger Haidian district) has grown into China’s top tech hub: 1) Academic HubRight next door are China’s top two universities, Peking University and Tsinghua University. But the northwest of Beijing is also home to countless other universities, including technical universities like USTB, BIT, BUPT, and Beihang. It’s the raw talent pool that has American industry leaders and politicians bemoaning a new “engineering gap.” The transition from farming village to technology hub began with technology research. In addition to the universities, funding came from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and later multinational corporations (MNCs). As Daniel Shi notes on Quora, “There is just a ridiculous number of MNCs with their R&D centers in Beijing: Nokia, Ericsson, Motorola, Sony Ericsson, Microsoft, IBM, Sun, Oracle, BEA, Alcatel Lucent, Google. Nowhere in the US do you have such a huge concentration of R&D organizations in one city.” Soon, a small market emerged in Zhongguancun to sell electronics to students and academics. Jack Xu, founder of lite-blog Diandian, describes a serendipitous meeting in that scene: In 1997, Zhongguancun Technology Park was a tiny village. It had only two buildings, and an assortment of entrepreneurs hustling their programming skills, taking government contracts, and hiring [Tsinghua] students like me to do the work. At times they might get RMB 100,000 for a contract, but pay us only RMB 5000, thus retaining 95% for themselves. Back then I could make a mere RMB 2000 a month, 1000 for myself and 1000 for my parents, so they wouldn’t need to farm anymore. To me, it was a responsibility, to survive on my own as early as possible. It was also because of my work in Zhonguancun that I became a well-known programmer in a small circle and later a real opportunity came along. That real opportunity was Jack Xu’s meeting with Joseph Chen in 1998. Today, Chen is the CEO of the social network Renren (NYSE: RENN), where Xu worked for five years, including as VP of the Interactive Division. 2) Government and MediaIn America, an entrepreneur hears “government” and runs the other way. In China, government is best kept close, out of choice or necessity. The Internet is one of the most private of industries in China, one of the few without huge state-owned firms, but the government still plays a key role. At the early stage it can be government contracts, subsidized office space in a tech park, or financing from a government-affiliated research institution. The government wants to build Beijing as a showcase capital in all aspects, so there’s extra funding for tech too. Once a startup reaches scale, government connections are key to everything from payment licenses to “content management.” When your video website is blocked because it was found to contain sensitive political or pornographic content, who you gonna call? Virtually all business in China is of “strategic national interest,” but some is extra-strategic. All media firms or even sites with user-generated content must have a big presence, if not their headquarters, in Beijing. 3) A Virtuous CycleA tech hub can build momentum that feeds upon itself. Startup founders come out of research centers and large technology firms, drawing upon their network for advice, seed funding, and talented employees. When the boss leaves to launch his own venture, it’s common for half of his division—the talented half—to go with him. The employee networks of Beijing-based tech giants like Baidu, Sohu, and Sina are becoming Chinese versions of the “PayPal Mafia.” In “Why Startup Hubs Work,” Paul Graham of Y-Combinator writes, “I think there are two components to the antidote: being in a place where startups are the cool thing to do, and chance meetings with people who can help you. And what drives them both is the number of startup people around you.” Like Silicon Valley, Zhongguancun also has a critical mass of people who are crazy enough to do startups. I wrote that Zhongguancun is China’s closest equivalent of Silicon Valley. The caveat is because there’s a lot happening elsewhere in China too. China’s three Internet giants are Baidu, Alibaba, and Tencent, but only search giant Baidu is headquartered in Beijing. Hangzhou is home to the Alibaba Group and its e-commerge empire (Taobao, TMall, Alipay, and Alibaba.com). Neighboring Shanghai is rich in gaming, MNCs, and venture capitalists, although they fly up to Beijing to do most of their deals. As far as tech hubs, this area is second after Beijing. Shenzhen is the headquarters of Tencent, China’s largest social networking and gaming company. Equally impressive is the hardware hacking coming out of the region. It’s home to countless entrepreneurial Shanzhai electronics manufacturers who copy, mix-and-mash, to create “Motoloba” handsets and “commemorative” Steve Jobs Android tablets. When you hear about “sub-$100 Chinese-flavored Android devices”, it’s Shenzhen leading the charge. Other up-and-coming hubs include Dalian, Chengdu, and Xi’an, Silicon Valley is often said to draw top talent because it has one of the best living environments on earth. No one would say that about Beijing. Beijing is an acquired taste, one that’s often smoky with pollution. In a Sinica Podcast discussing the soul of Beijing, China hand Jeremy Goldkorn of the blog Danwei.org called it “the anti-lifestyle capital, the anti-San Francisco.” The unpleasantness of the city, the lack of Shanghai’s creature comforts or Shenzhen’s sunshine, gives it an edge. There’s a gritty determination to seize the moment, whatever the obstacles in the way. One friend told me that Kai-fu Lee was recently asked why his startup incubator InnovationWorks wasn’t based in picturesque Chengdu, where the cost-of-living is low and the ladies are said to be the fairest in all of China. Lee jokingly replied to his entrepreneurs that when they’re happy and relaxed, he’s not. But do not mistake it for a city of automaton entrepreneurs. Beijing is at once “the center of authority and a hotbed of creative thinking” as Evan Osnos writes in “City of Dreams.” There are leaps of creativity. Sites that start as copycats evolve to become unrecognizable from the original, like the red-hot microblog Sina Weibo that today bears little resemblance to Twitter. When TechCrunch held its first international Disrupt Conference, it was right to come to Beijing. It’s dynamic, messy, and very different. But Silicon Valley aside, there’s no better place on earth for tech right now. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Horizons Ventures, the Hong Kong-based firm that manages the private, early-stage investments in the technology sector for billionaire entrepreneur, philanthropist, business magnate and Facebook and Spotify investor Li Ka-shing, has acquired a $3 million stake in water damage protection technology company HzO as part of a preferred equity investment. HzO was originally acquired by ZAGG in 2009 but since spun off as an independent company to improve and commercialize its ‘WaterBlock’ technology. This technology protects consumer electronics like phones, media players, laptops and whatnot from water and other liquids (for starters), “on the molecular scale”. From the company’s website: A nano-scale film with special water- repelling properties is applied to the entirety of the electronic device, seeping into the crevices, and rendering it highly water resistant. Take it in the rain or spill your drink on it — it will still run. It could even survive a drop in the toilet, but we hope you never have to find out. Utah-based HzO says it intends to integrate its technology not only in consumer electronics but also automotive devices, military devices and vehicles, solar energy, and industrial applications. Jason Wong, CFO of Horizons Ventures, will take a seat on HzO’s board of directors as part of the investment agreement. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post is written by Uzi Shmilovici, CEO and founder of Future Simple, the company behind Base—a simple CRM for small businesses What do Facebook, LinkedIn, Youtube, Dropbox and Skype have in common? Except for being ridiculously successful, they all enjoyed a strong viral effect that helped accelerate their growth. How did they do that? Here’s the thing; most people assume that these companies grew by pure word of mouth. Well, that’s only half of the story. The other half is that they deliberately built viral features into their products that helped spread the word. Let me explain. The Eight Types of Virality Many entrepreneurs struggle with the question: “How can I make my product more viral?” After looking at many successful web startups, I boiled down virality to eight different tactics, or types, that are the most common. Grab a pen: 1.    Inherent virality  The type of virality you’ll die for. Simply put, a person gets no value from the product unless other people use it as well. As a result, she shares the product with other people. Sharing is done via sharing mechanisms (e.g: invite your Gmail contacts) or through pure word of mouth. Seeding, which means getting the first people on board is very hard because of Metcalf’s Law (there’s very low value for the first users of the product). However, the growth after the seeding period, usually through word of mouth, can be explosive. This is how Skype came to be what it is. 2.    Collaboration virality  In this type of virality, a person will benefit from using the product individually. However, she can get additional value from collaborating with other people, so she invites them to use the product. A classic example is folder sharing on Dropbox. This works very well if the value from collaborating is high. 3.    Communication virality  In this case the product is used to communicate with other people, some of which might be potential users. By “riding” this communication channel (usually email), the product is being spread. If you ever got an email sent with Constant Contact, you probably remember seeing their logo at the bottom. A more pervasive example is the “Sent from my iPhone/iPad” signature at the bottom of every email you send from your iPhone or iPad. Yes, even Apple is using viral tactics (actually, I believe BlackBerry started that with “Sent using BlackBerry”). 4.    Incentivized virality  Offering an incentive to spread the word is a well-known tactic dating back to offline marketing. The incentive will usually be cash or a benefit in return of inviting other people to use the product. For instance, Gilt Group will give you a $25 credit for each person you refer. Dropbox will give extra space to both you and your invitee’s Dropbox accounts, which turned out to work very well. Personally, I’m not a big fan of the cash incentive approach as it is not very scalable but if you can make it work economically, it might be very effective. 5.    Embeddable virality  This method works superbly well for content websites. The ability to take a piece of content and embed it anywhere on the web, with a link back to the original website. This will put your product in front of countless users. There’s an interesting multiplier that occurs when new people who are exposed to the content embed it on their own website, promoting it even further. This approach has worked tremendously well for Youtube and Slideshare. 6.    Signature virality  Users that are using your product, either embed one of the features in their own website or refer people to a hosted page to use a specific feature. In both cases, when this feature is displayed to other people, it also includes a “powered by” signature at the bottom, which then becomes a lead generation machine. Survey products are well known for the “hosted survey” approach (SurveyMonkey probably started it). This has also worked well for helpdesk companies such as Uservoice.  7.    Social virality  In this case, companies leverage existing social networks to spread the word about their product. Typically, you sign up for the product with a social network id (say your Facebook id) and then through using the product, you broadcast to your social graph the fact that you are using it.  Zynga exploded on Facebook because every time you fed your goat, all your friends knew about it. Spotify’s killer integration with Facebook is another great example of that. There’s much more depth to explore on the specific mechanics of using this tactic, but if you get it right, you’ll experience tremendous growth. You can also add Twitter and Facebook accounts on top of an existing signup and broadcast to both whenever the user performs an action. Instagram does exactly that to get more exposure for the app and it seems to work well for them. Also, I have no idea what are the results of the CutCopy album page but I found their use of this tactic to be super interesting.  8.    Pure word of mouth virality  Pure word of mouth happens when people are spreading the word about the product just because they enjoyed it, it’s free, or they think it’s cool. While this is very hard to quantify, there are two things you can do to support that kind of virality. First, build an awesome product that people really love (Evernote). Second, make it special and give people something to talk about. That’s where branding comes into play. I don’t have their numbers but I can guess that a significant part of Mailchimp’s growth is from people talking about their funny quirkiness.  Measuring Virality If you are like me, then you cannot imagine doing anything without measuring it, or as Mark Pincus says: “You might as well not change it at all if you’re not going to measure the impact of that change.” Measuring virality is very interesting. Many people are focused on the “Virality Coefficient” – how many new users on average does one user of your product “infect.” The holy grail is to reach a virality coefficient greater than 1. This usually results in exponential growth. The virality coefficient is super important, but there’s one other critical number that you should pay attention to—the cycle time. The cycle time is the average time it takes from the moment that one of your users performs a viral action to the moment that a new user signs up because of this very action. It makes a huge difference if your cycle time is one day or 60 days. David Skok of Matrix Ventures gave a presentation about that recently, and actually devised a formula to calculate the amount of users you will get after a period of time based on the Virality Coefficient (K) and the Cycle Time (ct). Having virality expressed in this way is beneficial as it boils down virality to the optimization of two variables: maximize K and minimize ct. It’s really quite simple. Pass it on. Top image credit: hitthatswitch Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cooklet, a Poland-based cooking site founded by Grzegorz Trubiłowicz, features a lot of what you’d expect – lots of recipes, a few pictures of happy-looking skinny people who you know don’t eat much food, and some international flare. However, the rise of sites like Cooklet point to a change in the way people find recipes and make food. It’s a transition from the standard cookbook-based economy of yesterday’s kitchen to a more plugged-in experience we are now embracing. The site’s main draw are its many well-made tablet apps including versions for Android, a version for the Sony P, and a version for the Kindle Fire. The content, as it stands, is a bit of a mixed bag. Many recipes are in Polish but there are a nice selection of recipes for non-Slavs including something that looks like death on a plate, Gingerbread Carp.   In this season of holiday feasts, I think it’s time to recognize that there are now many great places where home cooks can find recipes and that cookbooks should watch their backs. My own favorite site, Epicurious, collates recipes from Gourmet and Bon Appetite in an app that is simple to use and promises a good meal every time. Other sites like AllRecipes do the same and now upstarts like Cooklet aim to further disrupt the scene. Where does this leave Rachel Ray and that one lady who likes butter? While I would not call cookbook writers culturally relevant, I think sites like these push their relevance even further into the niche. Why buy Anthony Bourdain’s Post-One-Week-Bender Cookbook for $40 when you can make truffled scrambled eggs, miso soup, and Watermelon Drink from recipes gathered online. Sure you don’t get all of Bourdain’s wit and wisdom, but who reads cookbooks for the prologue anyway?  This is also not to say that the veneration of great cooks isn’t important. However, I wonder how long it will be before the next great cooking personality comes from the web rather than the kitchens of WD50. Cooklet needs a lot of work. The UI is quite fresh and other cooking sites could do well to emulate it but the content, because it is user generated, could use an editor and translator to reach an international audience. However, that a young man in Wroclaw can take on Julia Child at her own game is not only impressive, it’s downright scary if my business is dependent on printing cookbooks. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Radionomy, which enables people to create and listen to radio stations online, is preparing the launch of a new service dubbed Streamonomy, which will essentially open up its platform to external radio stations, whether they broadcast online or the traditional, simulcast FM way. Streamonomy will also be available to online radio stations not produced with Radionomy, although the option to do so will of course remain available, free of charge. Radionomy has been growing by leaps and bounds this year, particularly in certain, large European countries, and by opening its ‘socialization’ and monetization platform to outside radio stations the company aims to accelerate this growth and attack new markets, including the US. One of the core services Radionomy offers to radio station operators is Adionomy, which enables advertisers to target a specific region or country (e.g. a radio station in the United States could run ads exclusively for French listeners, or even only those in, say, the Bourgogne area).  Streamonomy is expected to debut in the first half of January 2012. Radionomy, a Belgian-French venture, has raised about $2 million to date, but is currently in the midst of closing a $15 million funding round from a French investment bank. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Not everyone is cut out to work for a startup. It involves a lot of hustling, a lot of nail-biting, pizza-eating, sleeping at your desk, tears, failure, confusion, and on and on. And wearing your startup’s t-shirt. All the time. That being said, it can also be extremely rewarding and, with all the cash flying around Silicon Valley (and beyond), aspiring entrepreneurs are flocking to startups. So, say you’re one of those people who is champing at the bit to go work for a startup, what do you do next? Well, you can try this, or in the event you’re not quite ready to grow a mustache, you can check out things startups should know when looking for top talent, and, hey, Justin Kan has written about how to get a job at a startup even if you don’t have a lot of experience. But what about the programmers and developers out there looking to work at startup? Is no one thinking about them?!? Today, we’re offering a small slice of holiday cheer thanks to Monetate, the platform that provides marketers with testing and targeting services for their websites (and recently raised $15 million from OpenView Venture Partners, Floodgate, and First Round Capital), as the startup has put together an infographic that offers a few tips for programmers who are looking to toss their talents into the startup ring. Developers want to shoot for the top, and Facebook, Twitter, and Google are highly coveted places of employment for programmers for a reason; of course, the harsh reality is that not everyone is going to work at these companies, nor do all developers want to work at these companies. (Though there are great books like this one if that’s the road you choose.) Opting to go work for an early-stage business means hard work and sacrifice — and doesn’t always offer competitive salary/benefits — but it can mean more freedom, more of a say in the direction of a company, and the chance to disrupt the old and be a part of building the new. There are tons of places to find jobs, including cool career advancement platforms for developers like Gild, there are incubators, startup networking events and meetups, hackathons, and more. (Identified, anyone?) Developers can showcase their best work and hacks on Github, or go build something awesome with a favorite startup’s API to offer prospective employers a taste of what they would do were they to get hired. Startups are looking for programmers willing to take initiative, those who display creative thinking, and those work well with others (on deadline). Do those and you’re well on your way. That being said, be careful of overusing the words “rockstar” and “ninja” when talking about yourself. As much as we all like ninjas, a plastic sword, geeky interests (and familiarity with Java) do not a ninja make. Take it from this guy. Without further ado, check out Monetate’s infographic below. And to all the hearty programmers and developers out there, please chime in with your expert tips. This is by no means complete.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Guest contributor and early TechCrunch writer Steve Poland (@popo) is exploring a fund to join the “overcrowded” early stage investment market. His last contribution was “Will It End Very Badly?” Probably Not. If you’re asking which startup to build, not whether to build, you probably have several half-baked ideas and don’t know which one to devote yourself to. Or you have no idea at all. Max Levchin and Peter Thiel would tell you innovation is dead and that you should go work on real, world-changing, notable problems. They say too many young companies are solving small problems and creating features. TechCrunch writer Rip Empson would ask you to not build a copycat app. Paul Graham of Y Combinator would tell you to check out instead his list of 30 startup ideas he’s looking to fund. Or programmer Chris Moyer would tell you, “If you are asking what startup to build, then maybe you are too focused on doing a startup.  Find something you are so passionate about, that this isn’t a question. Then make that. Worry about the startup bit later.” It’s easy to get trapped and excited by the startup world we read about through the looking-glass of TechCrunch. Too many entrepreneurs focus their time on building things they think are cool or could be the next startup homerun. Stop building to get covered by TechCrunch or get an investment by Fred Wilson. What are your problems? That’s what you should be working on. Businesses are solutions to problems. Solutions come from ideas. Ideas are hypotheses. These hypotheses need to come from a defined problem. Humans have problems. There are an infinite amount of ideas out there. I have a list of 100+ web startup ideas that you can poach from, but who knows what problems they solve. There are millions of opportunities to change and disrupt this world. However, most of those opportunities are very small and might only change the world for you or a few (which isn’t a bad thing). Instead of brainstorming ideas, start by brainstorming problems. Problems are found in the processes that humans go through everyday. Start keeping notes of everything you do each day and things you observe others doing, at work and at home. Question the processes involved and write a few words explaining each step in the process. Jack Dorsey of Square questioned the retail purchase process and is now making it simpler and more pleasing for consumers. Dorsey asked why there were so many steps in the process of purchasing something: Why do I have to go into my wallet, pull out a credit card, swipe a credit card, wait awkwardly while a machine checks my authorization, wait for a receipt to print, wait to be handed the receipt from the cashier, sign the receipt, hand over the receipt, be given a hard copy of my receipt, put my credit card back into my wallet, all the while having a big uninviting machine in-between myself and the cashier? To start observing, start reading status updates by your friends on Facebook and Twitter to see what they are doing and talking about, but don’t fixate entirely on their complaints. There are many processes we all go through everyday that we accept without question, but could be simpler and more user-friendly. Just like that clunky retail purchase process that we all hadn’t questioned until a minute ago. Help fellow entrepreneurs know your problem. Try this: add one human process you go through either at home or at work to this Quora thread: “What processes do humans experience and what steps are involved in each?” Let’s talk about what problems need to be solved so that one of you can launch a startup to solve them. Image credit: Sean Rad; Instagram. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sigh. Here we go again.  A patent troll called Mount Hamilton Partners has filed two separate patent infringement lawsuits against daily deals juggernaut Groupon and Google, which also operates a digital couponing business called Google Offers. Mount Hamilton Partners, which purports to be an ‘investor in technology companies’ on its website, garnered headlines about two and a half years ago when it sued OpenTable right before the restaurant reservation service provider went public. Now they’re going after Google and Groupon. The patent in both cases is U.S. patent 7,904,334, entitled “System and method for reducing excess capacity for restaurants and other industries during off-peak or.” In the filings, Mount Hamilton Partners argues that the fact that services like Groupon and Google Offers help restaurants fill unused seats and build direct relationships – thus increasing loyalty – with individual customers, infringes its patent, causing ‘irreparable harm’.  The patent in question was filed for in May 2004 and approved earlier this year. As far as I can tell, Mount Hamilton has never produced or sold any ‘innovations’ based on its patented technology. Both suits seek damages. Both suits should have never been filed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kiip is not an ad network. It’s a mobile games reward network. Today it launches Swarm, a feature with a very unique value proposition: Let brands sponsor in-app tournaments where users win big prizes for high scores. Brands get exposure by piggybacking on an app’s existing user base, developers get paid, and users get to play for real-world rewards without being interrupted by ads. Swarm’s debut is a partnership with Walt Disney Studios’ film John Carter where players of the game Mega Jump compete from December 23-26 to win a home theater system and smaller prizes. Kiip launched in April 2011 on 10 games featuring 10 brands. Swarm builds off of Kiip’s core model where brands reward playerss with small product samples like PopChips, Sephora make-up, or BestBuy gift certificates when they complete in-game achievements. Now Kiip’s network includes 65 games, and 25 brands who pay between $0.25 and $3 per engagement with their rewards. The company is fueled by $4.1 million in Series A funding from Hummer Winblad, Dave Morin, True Ventures, and Crosslink Capital. 20-year old co-founder Brian Wong reveals to me Verizon Ventures is also an investor that was never announced. Those in early were smart. Kiip won’t need more funding soon as it’s making plenty of money, and I think it’s going to a be a major force in game monetization. That’s because Kiip actually cares about the emotions of gamers, not just their clicks. While Kiip’s reward system can be run alongside ad networks like AdMob and iAds, it will also disrupt them. Wong explains to me that big brands are already spending a lot on ads to promote their various contests and sweepstakes. By using Kiip to distribute through games instead, they get guaranteed exposure and only pay when people actually engage. Swarm opens Kiip up to brands in verticals such as travel, entertainment, and automotive who can’t give away a million cars or flights like PopChips gives away snacks. To protect the big prizes they’ll offer, Kiip has developed a fraud detection system to make sure high scores are attained legitimately. Next, Kiip plans to bring its  services to games on Facebook, console, and web. The company offers a win-win-win solution by rethinking the brand marketing and mobile monetization to put users first. Wong concludes, “You can’t fall in love with an ad, but you can fall in love with a reward.” Check out the new Kiip Spotlight to find out which games you can play to win rewards. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new, relatively stealth startup called Rock City Apps is gearing up for the launch of a mobile application called UpTo, and has raised an undisclosed amount in seed funding from Detroit Venture Partners and Ludlow Ventures to finance the development of the product. The company, which is based in Detroit, Michigan, plans to launch its first iPhone app ‘soon’ and lets you indicate your interest by inviting you to sign up to receive an invitation to the private beta. You can do that here. Rock City Apps co-founder and chief executive Greg Schwartz, previously founder and CEO of Mobatech and director of business development at Warner Music, has this to say about the service: UpTo is a platform focused on the future tense that makes sharing calendar events simple and social. Other social applications are based on status updates and check-ins that are after-the-fact. UpTo lets friends see what’s coming, ahead of time.  The platform is built on top of your existing calendar and social graph.  Sounds interesting, but we’ll have to wait to see if it actually is. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You want the best price on things you buy second hand, but finding out how much you should pay is a hassle. Removing this friction from a lucrative part of the purchase funnel is the goal of Priceonomics. The first startup out of the winter 2012 Y Combinator batch, Priceonomics has crawled the web to compile its next-generation price guide. It launches today featuring 10 million prices on 50,000 products, and plans to expand across verticals soon. Here’s how it works. Let’s say you want to buy a TV on craigslist, a bike on eBay, or something from the TechCrunch holiday gift guide. Visit the site and search for the product. Priceonomics returns an estimate for how much you should pay for it along with a range of prices it’s crawled. It then displays listings of people selling it. Filter by keyword, proximity, and price to narrow the results. There’s also value to sellers, as they can check how they should be pricing their own products. Most listings I clicked had already been sold, but the site is designed for you to discover what you should pay, not necessarily where to buy. If you can wait a little while, enter your email address and Priceonomics notifies you when the product is posted at a great price. There’s also browsable price guides for specific product types. You could click Computers->Apple->MacBook to discover you should pay about $1000 for this used laptop, or at least somewhere between $682 and $1,318. Currently the site features 71 product types across categories like transportation, cameras, computers, phones, and TVs, but more are on the way.  Used product price guides aren’t new, especially for cars, but Priceonomics does it right. I love how quick and clean the site is. It’s so refreshing compared to slogging through Google product search results. My only gripe is that I have to click a listing to find out if it’s already been sold. With time I’m sure the founding team of CEO Michael Flaxman, CTO Omar Bohsali, and Rohin Dhar will sort this out and highlight active listings. Flaxman tells me developed the idea for Priceonomics because “I’m a serial craigslist shopper…[but] I’ve always found it really hard to figure out what things are worth.” I asked Flaxman why Priceonomics is different from existing price guides. He explained, “First, in almost all our verticals we’re the first price guide to exist. Want to know what a five-year old bicycle is worth? Good luck finding that! Second, our guides are generated by the collective knowledge of literally millions of people.  All the data is transparently available for everyone to see.  This gives us a credibility that doesn’t exist for the big car pricing sites.  This means that all of our guides are constantly updated automatically as we continue to index the web, so there’s no risk of our prices becoming stale.” Because it fits into the purchase funnel at the stage where people are clearly trying to buy something, the Priceonomics has big monetization potential. Featured product guides for brands, sponsored search results, traditional display, lead generation, and affiliate links would all work. While the rest of the Winter YC class will launch soon, Priceonomics made a smart push to get out the door today. It may have missed the pre-holiday shopping blitz, but there’ll be plenty of people looking to spend cash gifts or find out whether they should return a new product and buy used instead. Update: I’ve heard back from the Priceonomics team and added several quotes to this article. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKaufer on SOPA and Testing ProductsAfter notching a spot on the NASDAQ, TripAdvisor’s Stephen Kaufer carved out a few minutes for Founder Stories, with host, Chris Dixon. In episode II of this interview, the two discuss their mutual disdain for the Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA) and Kaufer offers advice to founders. Highlighting a piece of advice, Kaufer tells Dixon a good way for “a consumer facing, web-based business” to capture what “your visitors really want” is to run a live test with a non-working link. Calling these “404-tests” he says “before you build the darn thing … see how many people click it. It goes nowhere, it says broken link to the user [but] your log file says how many people” checked it out. While the marketing department may not love the practice, Kaufer says it “solves umpteen meetings worth of powerful debate and logical arguments.” More advice follows – be sure to hear it all by watching the entire interview and watch episode I of this interview here. If you missed a past episode of Founder Stories, you can get caught-up here. Guests include leaders from BirchBox, Foodspotting, GroupMe, DropBox, Tumblr and KickStarter. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Interview Street has been busy building out new ways for developers to prove their skills to potential employers, and now it’s introducing a 48-hour contest to help them show off their skills. Think of it as part of a next-generation way of finding the right employer The site already offers a web-based integrated development environment, where developers can choose from dozens of challenges, lets them input answers, then get immediate results. If they’re successful, recruiters from a variety of leading technology companies can then contact them about getting hired. The new contest is called CodeSprint (it’s the second in a series), and it’s basically an online hackathon. Individual developers are given 48 hours to come up with solutions to as many programming challenges as they can get done, including both theoretical challenges as well as real-world problems. Cofounder Vivek Ravisankar tells me he expects that developers will be able to get about ten done within that time. “Everything will be based on performance — how fast they code, how many they get right.” Developers can also indicate which companies they hope to work for, which the companies will then see at the end of the contest. Each participant will also be able to show off their scores and resumes. You can sign up here and get more information here. The contest will begin on January 6th, 2012, at 8pm Pacific Time. I wish there was something out there like this for prospective bloggers, since speed and accuracy are also crucial in this business. When I told that to Ravisankar, he responded by saying that in fact that was already the vision — to build out this type of service across verticals to figure out the optimal candidates for any type of job. And by the way, CodeSprint also sounds like a good experience for anyone who’s thinking about starting their own company instead of getting hired. The company has also recently launched a beta that lets developers take a 24-hour real-world problem challenge. They’ll get a server instance and be asked to build a prototype solution within the allotted time. Check out the main site for a selection of theoretical and real-world problems. Participating companies include Amazon, Facebook, Quora, Dropbox, Airbnb, and other hot tech companies and startups. Interview Street has angel funding from Y Combinator and Morpheus Venture Partners. Competitors for this type of developer challenge service include CodeEval and Gild. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SpotMe, a handy little tool for sharing expenses in groups, is now a top 10 mobile app in the finance category and a featured app in Apple’s App Store Rewind 2011. Zornitza Stefanova, the CEO of SpotMe’s maker Boomerang Digital, describes the app as “a social messenger for payments.” What that means is that the app takes over the often uncomfortable job of having to ask your friends for the money they owe – it does that for you. An early version of the app was launched this July, but the most recent update just arrived mid-December, bringing with it helpful new features like messaging and email summaries. After installation, you can sign up for an account using Facebook and then add friends to a group by pulling their info from your phone’s address book or by typing in an email manually. It’s really fast to set up the bill you’re splitting, the money you lent, the rent, or any other expense you want to split with others. And speed, as we all know, is key when doing these sorts of things on the fly, lest you turn into the geek with your nose in your phone all night.  As new bills are added to the group, an automatic email goes out from SpotMe to those owing as a reminder. Stefanova says the top use cases the company is seeing involve college students, bills split among friends, roommates, and the occasional IOU. Although at present, the app only functions as a tracking tool for managing money owed, the company has something really interesting cooking: it’s planning to integrate a person-to-person (p2p) payment mechanism next year, sometime around the launch of its Android app. That will then position SpotMe against other p2p payment apps, including PayPal, Venmo, ZipPay, Square, Dwolla, and others, which should be interesting. So many of today’s apps have started by addressing the technological hurdle of moving money digitally using your smartphone, but not the psychological hurdle that come from having to talk to friends about the money they owe you. The core focus of the app, with its simple setup, email and push notifications, is to let the app do the dirty work of reminding friends about money they owe. Meanwhile, you can pretend that the money was the furthest thing from your mind. “Oh? You got an email about the dinner we split last week? I totally forgot!” (Sure you did). We definitely needed an app for that. You can check out the newest version of SpotMe here on iTunes. (Sorry Android users. For now, the web app will have to do). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Akamai has indeed acquired Cotendo, one of its largest competitors, in a deal valuing the CDN and site acceleration services company at approximately $268 million. The confirmation comes nearly a month after Israeli business press reported that Akamai was mulling an acquisition of the website and mobile acceleration technology vendor for up to $350 million. Under the terms of the agreement, Akamai will acquire all of the outstanding equity of Cotendo in exchange for a net cash payment of $268 million, after accounting for expected purchase price adjustments, plus the assumption of outstanding unvested options to purchase Cotendo common stock. The transaction is expected to close in the first half of 2012. Says Paul Sagan, president and CEO of Akamai: “As we look to accelerate growth across the dynamic landscapes of cloud and mobile optimization, we are excited to be joining forces with Cotendo.  Cotendo’s technology, partnerships and people are a strong complement to Akamai.  Together, we believe there is tremendous opportunity for our combined technologies as enterprises embrace the move to the cloud and seek solutions for an increasingly mobile world.”  Founded in 2008, Cotendo is headquartered in Sunnyvale, California, and employs roughly 100 people (of which half work out of its R&D facilities near Netanya, in Israel).  Cotendo has raised over $36 million in funding from investors like Sequoia Capital, Benchmark Capital and Tenaya Capital. The company specializes in acceleration services for dynamic Web apps, static and dynamic web content, performance monitoring and automatic failover as well as real-time reporting and analytics.  A few months ago, Cotendo raised $17 million in new funding from its previous backers, with Citrix Systems and Juniper Networks stepping in as strategic investors as well. Other strategic partners include Google, AT&T and Sumitomo Corporation. Cotendo customers include Zynga, Vistaprint and Facebook. Notably, the company’s advisory board includes Jonathan Heiliger, currently VP of Technical Operations at Facebook. On an interesting sidenote: a year ago, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology joined Akamai in suing Cotendo over patent infringement (which in turn reminds me of Nuance’s recent acquisition of Vlingo, which also occurred after – years of – patent litigation between the two parties). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest contributor Ben Savage is the founder of Spaceport.io, a native Javascript and HTML5 platform for mobile game developers. From tech titans like Zynga, Facebook, Microsoft, Google and Apple, to startups just launching, the battle lines of 2012 will be drawn across the landscape of HTML5. Below are 14 bold predictions for how HTML5 will evolve in 2012. Welcome to a more interconnected web: In 2012, HTML5 will be adding support for some really useful and cool APIs that allow onewebsite to connect to another. For example, Zynga games on Facebook run inside of iframes. Using the new postMessage API these games will be able to communicate within the containing Facebook frame directly. Before HTML5, inter-window communication had to rely on a remote server – or use unreliable hacks. Another exciting addition is CORS (Cross Origin Resource Sharing). This will make it much easier for different websites to share information with one another. For example, CORS will enable startups to create photo-editing services that download your photos from Facebook, let you modify them, and then re-upload them – again without having to resort to ugly hacks. With all of the new semantic information (see Semantics and Microdata) available with HTML5, it will become much easier to create web tools that extract information from web pages. As a result, you can expect to see a plethora of new mashup services, as well as better browser modes (like readers and translators). Web browsers will look more like iPhones Everyone loves Apple’s iOS. Now it’s coming to the HTML5 web. In 2012 your browsers will startsporting push notifications, geolocation, and offline capable applications. Some browsers will likely adopt a more iOS-like user interface that will make the comparison all the more apt. More and more applications will just be built in HTML5 instead of downloadable apps If you’re like me, you already use web apps for email, calendars, and photo-sharing, but in 2012 more classes of applications will be HTML5 enabled. Next up, you can expect to see content creation apps like Inkscape and Illustrator emerge for HTML5 and start to catch on. Internet Explorer & Microsoft will dramatically improve in coolness. Internet explorer’s reputation will stop being “the browser where nothing works right” and start being “the fast browser”. Microsoft has made major investments into improving HTML5 performance that will give IE 10 a huge performance lead over competing browsers. Its hardware accelerated “canvas” will blow away all the other browsers in any speed test. Microsoft is also adding interesting ways for the HTML5 web and the desktop to work together that will really spice up its operating system. Having good support from IE will be the impetus that will really turn the tide in favor of authoring HTML5 applications. Browser manufacturers will get into the App Store business Taking a cue from Apple, browser manufacturers will start to realize that they are missing out by not being in the app store business. Google Chrome already has an integrated app-store as its splash page. Expect many other browsers to follow. This is actually a good thing for HTML5 application developers – it means more distribution opportunities for apps, although platform specific payment systems and platform revenue-shares will follow later on. At least one major console game released or re-released using WebGL In 2012, at least one AAA console game company is going to make the leap and decide to launch a 3D title on the web using WebGL instead of (or in addition to) creating a downloadable client. It might be a re-release of a well-known title (Like “Team Fortress 2” or “Assassins Creed”), or another way to play a popular MMO (like “Eve Online” or “World of Warcraft”), or it may be an entirely new title launching for the first time. Many more applications will use offline cache and will work offline The offline application cache will dramatically improve the usability and speed of HTML5 apps. Querying a local database will allow applications to avoid a round-trip to the server, eliminating that laggy web-app feel that makes us all prefer native apps today. In 2012, expect to see a few issues arise from this extended usage. You’ll lose your work by clearing your cache at least once or twice. Also expect security vulnerabilities to keep showing up that allow malicious applications to access private files stored on your computer by anotherwebsite. HTML5 ads will become prevalent and overtake Flash ads Website owners keen to monetize the increasingly large amount of traffic coming from iOS devices will demand HTML5 ads (rather than Flash ads). Startups will emerge to serve this market. These startups will solve the sand boxing, security, and authoring tools issues that this new market will face. Now that HTML5 is capable of doing everything that flash ads commonly do, it’s just a matter of time before they take over. JavaScript will get a lot faster with better memory management and typed arrays JavaScript has gotten really, really fast – it’s already among the world’s fastest scripting languages – but there is room for improvement. Google Chrome has started pushing the envelope on better memory management and garbage collection algorithms. This, combined with typed arrays, will bring JavaScript performance closer to more mature languages like Java. Canvas will get hardware acceleration in more browsers (but no major mobile browsers) Other browser makers will follow Internet Explorer’s lead and add hardware acceleration to their canvas implementations. Those that don’t will suffer a severe loss in mind-share. Firefox is most at-risk in this regard. If Mozilla fails to accelerate their canvas it risks being portrayed as the new IE — slow and bloated and burdened down with legacy code. However, in 2012, no major mobile browsers will successfully roll out a hardware-accelerated canvas. We will have to wait until 2013 to start seeing that catch on. People will play popular HTML5 games on their mobile devices from Zynga and others, but they will be very simple games You can expect to see your friends playing games like Zynga Poker, Words with Friends, and Mafia Wars on their mobile phones, running purely in HTML5. These games will be played on both destination websites and within native applications (like the Facebook app). However, successful HTML5 games on mobile devices will be limited to menu-based games, card games, board games, turn-based multiplayer games, and avatar customizer games. More complex and visually intensive Zynga “Ville” style games with isometric worlds or hundreds of animating sprites will not yet strike gold in 2012. Facebook will release improved HTML5-based APIs that allow for more seamless integration with external websites In its continued quest to be the de facto social-graph of the web, Facebook Connect will grow and expand to take advantage of new HTML5 features. This will allow even deeper and richer integration of Facebook connect with external websites and services. Facebook will get a lot more seamlessly integrated with your desktop Think drag-and-drop, file system access, photo synching, and widgets on your desktop. All of these features (and more) will start to blur the line between desktop and browser, bringing your social graph more closely into contact with your traditional desktop experience. Apple will NOT fix HTML5 sound in mobile Safari HTML5 sound used to work well in mobile Safari, back in the days iOS3. However, Apple disabled most of the API in iOS 4 and 5. It just introduces competition for iTunes — both the music store, and the App Store. In its continued fight to maintain total control over the Apple ecosystem, they will refrain from fixing HTML5 sound in 2012. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInStephen Kaufer on TripAdvisor’s IPOEarlier today, TripAdvisor added its name to the list of companies publicly trading on the NASDAQ. After doing so, TripAdvisor’s co-founder Stephen Kaufer stopped by TechCrunch for a Founder Stories interview with host, Chris Dixon. TripAdvisor offers user-generated reviews of everything from hotels to restaurants and claims “50 million monthly unique visitors and 20 million members.” Healthy numbers now, but dial back a decade and TripAdvisor was gasping for air. Kaufer says 18-months in “we had no clients, we had no revenue and we were running out of money.” Realizing time was short, the team dumped their initial business model after recognizing a demo they released on the side “to showcase what someone else could do with [our] technology” was gathering steam. Leadership built a plan around the concept, added a “write your own review” button and was off to the races with what we now know as TripAdvisor. Kaufer dives into additional detail on those early days, discusses Expedia’s acquisition of his company and voices concerns about Google as the interview unfolds. Make sure to see it all by watching the entire exchange. Also be sure to check out Chris Dixon’s thoughts on the interview, the IPO, and issues surrounding it all on his blog, cdixon.org. Episode II of Kaufer’s interview is coming up. Past Founder Stories interviews featuring Mayor Bloomberg, David Karp, Dennis Crowley and many other leaders are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInAdvice from Charity: Water’s Scott HarrisonIn Scott Harrison’s final Founder Stories interview with host, Chris Dixon, Harrison offers some suggestions to other founders and discusses how people can donate to Charity: Water. Harrison says “one of the simplest ways to help is to give up your birthday.” By this he means “instead of throwing a birthday party, instead of asking or even accepting gifts, people just ask for their age in dollars.” Once Charity: Water has the cash in-hand Harrison says “every single dollar with integrity is tracked though the accounting system to the project that it actually funded.”  Charity: Water has collected “over $10-million” this way. Offering advice to others, Harrison says “I think one of the key and very simple things is get lawyers to help you file for your 501(c)(3).” While the upfront costs may seem prohibitive, he believes spending money to hire a professional is well worth the expense. Harrison also advises leaders to do themselves a favor and figure out how to clearly and simply communicate their message. He says people “can go on for 6 or 7 sentences, trying to expound on their mission statement, at the end you are like so what do you guys do again?” Before the interview wraps, Harrison shares a few more tips, so be sure to watch the full conversation to hear them all. Episode I of this interview is here. Episode II is here. Past Founder Stories episodes featuring Mayor Bloomberg, Billy Chasen, David Lieb, Drew Houston, Scott Heiferman and many other founders are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, a new startup accelerator for women, the Women Innovate Mobile (WIM) Accelerator, is opening its doors for applications. The program will start off small, offering two to five companies seed funding of $18,000, plus mentoring, support, and free office space in New York during the course of its three-month program. The company was founded by Veronika Sonsev, the co-founder of inSparq and the non-profit Women in Wireless, Deborah Jackson, founder of JumpThru, and business strategist Kelly Hoey. “Accelerators are dominated by men and Women Innovate Mobile is the first dedicated to cultivating female founders,” said Kelly Hoey, WIM’s Managing Director. “No one disputes the talent and capabilities of female entrepreneurs, yet they remain severely underrepresented among mentor-driven accelerator programs. That’s why we developed an accelerator program just for women-led mobile ventures.” The program will follow the usual accelerator path of offering guidance and assistance over a few months’ time, culminating in a Demo Day in front of investors. WIM has already attracted a notable group of mentors and instructors, including Gilt Groupe’s Alexandra Wilkis Wilson, Klout’s co-founder Binh Tran and Starvest’s Jeanne Sullivan, plus experts from AppNexus, Forbes, Formula Capital, Bank of America, Sequoia Lab, GoldenSeeds, Tapjoy and Women 2.0. Applications are open now and will close on February 1st.  The program is scheduled to launch in March 2012. Interested participants can sign up here. Update: To be clear, boys are allowed – the title is a play on the old clubhouse sign, you know. Live a little, folks. WIM criteria:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Are you a big fan of Life Of Pi? Well don’t go and get the Story Of O just because they sound similar. Instead, put your query to BookLamp, a free service/project aimed at creating a database of “like” books. Similar to Pandora, the service is based on the Book Genome Project and attempts to find books that are similar based on measurable criteria. The project, founded in 2003, is trying to figure out the “DNA” of certain books by rating them based on various characteristics. Like similar music services, BookLamp gives books different ratings based on their content. These ratings drive a recommendations engine that can  For example, The DaVinci Code is filed under History/Culture, Catholic Institutions, and Travel. These traits are compared to other books and rated based on similarities. From the website:Sadly, the site is still fairly incomplete as it needs many more books in order to create a complete picture of many titles. The organization is working on adding more titles as we speak, which is actually quite important as we enter the era of ereaders and book rentals. I could see services like this playing an important part in future systems for book rental recommendations a la Netflix, for example, allowing folks to read multiple titles in a genre without the hit or miss of current book discovery and marketing. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As we heard in August, SimpleGeo founder Matt Galligan left the company to pursue other interests. SimpleGeo was then bought by UrbanAirship in November, and fellow co-founder Joe Stump left the newly acquired startup to launch new projects like Sprintly and (just today) Lens.ly. Galligan recently announced that he teamed up with Shervin Pishevar to launch their new organization 1% of Nothing, which is aimed at inspiring early-stage companies and entrepreneurs to donate 1% of their equity to a cause of their choice. And now it looks like Galligan also may have another startup up his sleeve—Circa. According to this AngelList posting, Galligan is teaming up with Cheezburger founder and CEO, Ben Huh, to launch Circa. Huh will take a non-operational role, but will be an advisor and on the board of directors. Details on what Circa is are unclear but it appears that the startup will be focusing on disrupting the news and content space. From the posting, We want to create the best news experience by optimizing for truths, encouraging diversity, and empowering the readers. Galligan tells me that Huh came up with basic idea for Circa from his “Moby Dick Project,” whose goal is to create discussions about how and what can be done to solve the problems we face with news presentation. Galligan says the concept has evolved significantly from some of these early thoughts. Galligan explains, “We’ve got a pretty massive vision for where this goes, but we’re starting out with changing the way that breaking news is written, distributed and read. This isn’t going to be another social news app, or aggregator. We’ve re-imagined the entire process of news from the ground up to produce the news experience that we would want to be a part of.” Clearly Galligan has a proven record of creating valuable companies. He sold his first startup, Socialthing to AOL in August 2008. And SimpleGeo just had an exit. News is an interesting area for Galligan to tackle. He addressed social life streaming with SocialThing, and SimpleGeo focused on location-based products. But Huh has been playing in the media space with his Cheezburger empire and holds a journalism degree from Northwestern. With both Huh and Galligan’s track record, Circa is sure to be worth a look. Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The photo-sharing market is saturated, and, by and large, we don’t need more players. The players that are there, if they’re not leading, are trying to differentiate themselves from the rest in a host of different ways. In the case of Tracks, while it is, by makeup, a photo-sharing app, CEO Vic Singh says that the startup really isn’t trying to solve a photo-sharing problem so much as its building a service where people can create small networks around shared experiences in the real world.  In October, we covered the startup’s launch of its iOS app, which seeks to do just that by leveraging “the experience graph” to allow users to create on-the-go group photo albums, and merge online and offline worlds by allowing users to turn those photos into printable physical photo books, and so on. The idea is really to create unique micro-social networks that revolve around real world experiences. Users can snap pictures, then filter those images automatically in realtime, streaming their “tracks” to iOS devices via airplay, receive news and updates through a feed that presents activity from friends across tracks and networks, as well as geo-tag photos to show where pictures were taken and when — all viewable through an interactive map.   “Tracks” are users’ social photo stories, and the Tracks CEO thinks that, rather than basing an app on Facebook Connect and a user’s friend network, users want a more realistic mapping of fluid networks in realtime — thus, “Tracks” are micro-networks that cut across networks that enable users to make and share experiences easily. That being said, apparently Tracks wants to do both. Previously, users had to invite their friends to join a Track, but the team has upgraded its iOS app to to allow friends to join Tracks based on their social graph, rather than just the invite-only model. I’m not necessarily buying another graph, nor am I convinced that Tracks can beat Instagram or a mobile Pinterest, though I think inherently the concept behind Tracks has some power. Making social photo stories is something mobile users inherently want to do in realtime and on-the-go, but the user experience has to be seriously differentiated from the rest. Tracks has some of the best features of the leading photo sharing apps, filters like Instagram, and so on. But does it do it better? Well, more than a couple of investors are willing to bet that it does. Today, the startup has announced that it has raised $1 million in seed funding to go after the mobile experience graph. The investors include General Catalyst, TMT Investments, Eniac Ventures, AppFund, BHV Ventures, Harbor Road Ventures, Atventure.us, and a handful of angels including Photobucket founder Alex Welch, who will be joining the board. It’s a big vote of confidence for the young startup, which launched at TechCrunch Disrupt NYC in May. Not bad for six months. For more, check out Tracks at home here. And chime in to let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Open Home Pro has been quietly building a business that uses the iPad to solve a serious problem for a real-world industry. “My girlfriend would come back upset after showing people houses,” founder Andrew Machado tells me, “because people wouldn’t fill out their information. It’s like the people standing outside of Whole Foods — you instinctively don’t want to give them your information.” The app offers a polished interface to help realtors collect prospective buyer’s information, and it’s been building on top of that with a set of other features that are designed to make the home-sales process easier. These include a photo slideshow to help a realtor show off all of their prospective listings to clients, a filter showing which client leads are the most interested in buying, custom landing pages for each listing, email lead management, and a way to share listing times to Facebook and Twitter. It’s shipping a new version today, with a new user interface, that also includes features like a way to let people sign up who aren’t at an open house. So, it’s not just a listing-collection app, but a lightweight CRM.  Up to this point, the app has 15,000 realtors using it, Machado says, noting that a large portion of people in the indstury already have iPads that they use for work. They’ll use DocuSign to collect buyer signatures and close deals, and real-estate apps like Trulia and Redfin to show related listings, and Realtor.com for a variety of services (including a competing product called BrightOpen). The company is in the process of raising an angel round, and has been incubated at Dogpatch Labs Palo Alto. You can download the iPad app here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Omada Health, a graduate of Rock Health’s first batch of startups, is announcing today that it has raised $800K in seed funding from a number of angel and venture investors, including Esther Dyson, NEA, Aberdare, Kapor Capital, and TriplePoint Ventures to name a few. Omada Health, simply put, has turned its focus to one of the most pervasive diseases in the country: Diabetes. Well, really, prediabetes. The CDC estimates that 79 million people in the U.S. currently have prediabetes — said another way, that’s approximately 1 in 3 adults. And the majority of those people are not aware of their condition, which essentially means that they are suffering from blood glucose levels that are not irregular enough to be considered diabetes, yet still indicate an extremely high risk of progressing to full-blown diabetes. And the projection is pretty grim. If nothing is done, the CDC estimates that half of the American population could have diabetes or prediabetes by 2020. Besides bringing attention to the ways that food is being produced, distributed, and consumed, Omada Health Co-founder Sean Duffy tells us that lifestyle programs have been (and are being) designed which can dramatically reduce a person’s risk of progressing from prediabetes to diabetes. The Diabetes Prevention Program, for example, was a recent, major multicenter clinical research study that developed a 16-week lifestyle program that succeeded in reducing progression by 58 percent. Omada Health, then, is leveraging these types of research and programs to bring interventions to the millions of people with prediabetes through group-based programs, “human-centered design, behavioral science”, and web technology. Duffy tells me that the startup aims to be (one of the first) online platforms for delivering preventative care at scale — at a cost point that demonstrates compelling ROI for insurance providers or self-insured employers.  The Omada program matches people with prediabetes into small groups, pairing each group with a “facilitator” trained in the Omada curriculum, who then guides patients through a 16-week lifestyle course. While progressing through the course, Omada tracks their progress using a cellular-connected scale as well as other metrics. So far, the startup has run two prototypes and is currently preparing for a larger pilot early in 2012.  The startup was first conceived as an internal project at the global design consulting firm, IDEO, where Duffy and co-founder Adrian James were both employed. In May, the two left IDEO to join Rock Health, were later joined by two more staffers, and today the team has added a round of seed funding to push forward with their pilot program and ramp up hiring.  We’re looking forward to hearing more about the pilot program, so stay tuned. For more, check out Omada Health at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Toronto-based deal provider Dealfind is on the move, having recently gone mobile, and, as of today, is launching something called “Everyday Deals.” The feature is somewhat similar to GrouponNow in that it allows you to find deals you can buy and use right now. But really, the site is more of a deals database, where deals are searchable by location, category and redeemable time. The new Everyday Deals site lets you filter through the available deals using drop-down boxes at the top. You can see how this works using Calgary as an example. Times are split into early morning, morning, mid-day, afternoon, evening and late night. Despite once being known as “Canada’s Groupon,” Dealfind has expanded since its founding in 2009 and is now in 70 markets across both the U.S. and Canada. Much of that expansion has been fairly recent. In November, Dealfind added 18 more U.S. markets to its lineup, bringing the total to 41 U.S. cities versus the 29 it has in Canada.   It has sold 1,729,883 vouchers valued at $405,900,647. Dealfind’s deal quality still has room to improve in some cases. (Is anyone else sick of all those mani/pedi offers? Ugh). The new feature is live now, but not all supported markets have deals listed as of yet. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sincerely, the company behind photo-printing iOS app Postagram, is launching a new app today. It’s designed to capture all the nostalgia that you and your family feel about those disposable camera photo sets you all shot during the holidays over the last couple decades. Called Dotti (maybe your effusive aunt’s name, too?), you download it from the App Store or Android Market, get 12 photos to shoot, and then get the option to send them off to be made into high-quality 4×6 prints for $4.99. You’ll get back the photos by mail in less than a week. Among the many improvements over real disposable cameras, you get the option to edit and delete any photos in the roll that you don’t want before sending it off. Oh, and you get the high-quality phone camera instead of the cut-rate one that came with the original version.  The whole interface is designed to make you feel like you’re using the real thing, though. You see a roll of film in the back when you first load it up, which you cycle through as you use up shots. You see photo counter and get the camera-clicking noise as you progress through the roll. Once you’re done shooting and you’ve sent it off, the app resets as if you’ve stuck in a new role of film. The company is timing this launch ahead of Christmas, so you can take photos with your family and get them back before New Years. Of course you could just use your phone to take photos, then use Apple’s own printing service to get them, or another third party like Sincerely’s Postagram. But the point is creating a special and highest-quality experience, founder Matt Brezina tells me.  “When I started thinking about it over a year ago, I felt that the iPhone was the new camera, and that one of the business models around it was that a printed photos was one of the world’s simplest and most appreciated gifts,” he explains. “So I thought: what’s the easiest way to send? First we had Postagram, and from there we built the Sincerely Ship iOS library for other developers, then holiday cards so we made Sincerely Inc. The other thing that customers said is that they wanted to put photos into a frame to archive. So we could have created some sort of utility app for that — or a disposable camera.” The app has just gone live for iOS and Android, and you can learn more about it here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily StartupBus, the hackathon/road trip combo started by Elias Bizannes nearly three years ago, is doubling the number of events it runs in 2012. There will be a maximum of twelve buses that run in the new year, up from six previously. But here’s the fun part: the organization will determine which regions get their own Startup bus through an online competition requiring hopefuls to “vote up” their region through social media. Starting today, the organization is launching the voting website at StartupBus.com/unlock, which now features nine cities plus three schools (dubbed “tribes” in StartupBus lingo): Stanford, MIT and Harvard. To vote for your region, you just click the appropriate button to tweet or Facebook “like” your selection. If your city isn’t represented on the list, you can email the address provided to be considered for inclusion. StartupBus began as an experiment, but has expanded over the past couple of years to become an international event, competition and community – a group that now includes 200 people. In the U.S., the bus heads to SxSW in March and in Europe, it goes to LeWeb in December. The bus is currently popular in areas like San Francisco, New York, Boston, Cleveland (Cleveland?!) and Tampa due to active StartupBus alumni. It should be noted that voting alone won’t ensure a region gets chosen in 2012. The final determination will be made based on the number and quality of the applications submitted when those open up in January. Says Bizannes, “regional hype without enthusiastic future applicants that are of a high calibre means nothing in the scheme of things.” But it will help. “We want to help raise visibility of the rising technology communities that have the local talent and passion to prove it,” says Bizannes. So get voting. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Internet holding company FriendFinder Networks, which operates a number of adult, social networking, dating and e-commerce websites, has quietly established a game development subsidiary back in 2010.  Today, the company said that the studio, which is called Fierce Wombat Games, will be releasing its first title for Mac, PC and iOS in early 2012. Based in San Jose, CA, the studio is led by Graeme Bayless, a former exec at companies like Groove Media, 2K Games and Namco. The studio’s mission, straight from Boss Wombat’s mouth: “to build and publish games as compelling and fun as the classics that drew all of us into games”. We’ll wait and see. Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco-based Fingerprint Digital, a startup building educational apps for kids, is blowing up. The company released its first apps into iTunes on December 1st, and already, it has seen over 270,000 game playing sessions for a combined total of over 2 million minutes played. And, according to CEO Nancy MacIntyre, its apps are about to reach download numbers in the six figures. In just two weeks, Fingerprint pushed two of its games into the top five in the educational apps’ category: Big Kid Life Firefighter and Big Kid Life Fairy Princess. (And yes, despite what those titles sound like, they are actually games for learning.)  The key to the startup’s early success is having an innovative twist on educational gaming combined with a solid team. Fingerprint was started by Nancy MacIntyre, formerly the EVP of Products and Marketing at LeapFrog, and Brad Edelman who co-founded social gaming company PlayFirst. It also has Heather Regan, the former COO of Everloop, as VP of Product Management and Learning. Former game marketing lead at 2K Games (a division of Take Two Interactive) Phil Shpilberg is on board as well, serving as VP of Marketing. What’s great about what Fingerprint is doing is that it’s re-opening the lines of communication between parent and child – lines which are often shut down as the kid gets sucked deeper into the video gaming world. Not only are the company’s apps educational, they also feature a built in sharing platform (“Mom-Comm”) which allows kids to share their progress with their parents. The grown-ups get to stay in the loop (for a change) with a news feed detailing their child’s progress and activity. In return, the parent can then provide encouragement and support through text and voice messages that are played directly in the game. Through this proprietary system, parents have received over 500,000 “snapshot” reports in December, the company says. And the kids are addicted, too: average gameplay sessions last 7.35 minutes and kids have returned to the games four times this month. The company now has five apps: three “Big Kid Life” titles (Fire Fighter, Veterinarian, Fairy Princess), Play Maker and one third-party app Do Re Mi 1-2-3. They’re really well-made, quite cute and a lot of fun. You can check out the complete set here. The third-party app is the first to use the Fingerprint SDK, which allows any title to integrate the parent-child communication system for free in exchange for revenue share with Fingerprint. The company says it will vet the titles first to make sure they have a strong educational foundation. Fingerprint raised $1.4 million in funding earlier this fall, and says its goal is to build a large network with dozens of apps. It will release several new apps next quarter including one that they’re dubbing their “biggest product initiative” and an “all new app experience.” Fingerprint is currently giving away its apps (typically $1.99-$2.99) for free, in conjunction with its Facebook promo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SurDoc is doing what Adobe has sort of done with its PDF file format, which is make it as easy as possible to share formatted documents across computers and mobile devices without losing the formatting. The difference it offers is that you don’t need to mess with any file formating or PDF reader to access the documents — or with all of the vulnerabilities of PDFs. You can just upload text, spreadsheet and presentation files (so Word, Excel, Powerpoint, etc.) to its online service, and share them from there. The company, whose product is live today as a trial, has also let us know that it has raised a $4 million round of funding from IDG Ventures. While the online service currently offers 10 GB of storage as part of its trial, TechCrunch readers can get 20 GB by entering the following code when they sign up: TCLAUNCH. SurDoc’s technology is based on UOML, a new document standard whose development was led by company founder Alex Wang, that’s been approved an international information open standards body OASIS. That organization’s members include Google, Microsoft, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, the U.S.Department of Defense and the University of California. SurDoc currently allows you to annotate documents, although full editing capabilities aren’t in place yet. Future plans include adding complete fidelity for Google Docs, the company’s Peter Junge tells me. Current document formats that can be imported include: .doc, .docx, .xls, .xlsx, .ppt, .pptx, ODF, PDF, XPS, SVG and HTML. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This guest post was written by Evolver.fm Editor Eliot Van Buskirk, who has covered and occasionally anticipated music and technology intersections for under 15 years for CNET, Wired.com, McGraw-Hill, and The Echo Nest. He plays a bass, rides a bicycle, and lives in Brooklyn. Once upon a time, we bought our concert tickets from a good old-fashioned cashier at the local box office. As time went on, we took some of the work out of the hands of the cashier and started buying our tickets at home — on the Web. (For a fee, mind you.) And if what we’re seeing today is any indication, the next step in the evolution of the box office? Facebook. Ticketfly’s Facebook ticketing app, which launched last week, aims to boost sales by letting people know when their friends buy a ticket. The big idea is to complete the ticket-buying circle — from finding out about a show to buying a ticket — without ever sending the Facebook faithful outside the confines of their favorite social network. This could quickly become a big part of the ticketing market. Facebook’s artist pages are putting up old-style MySpace numbers as fans increasingly look to Facebook for artists they already know, and others they want to learn about. On top of that, many music services send, or “scrobble,” listening activity to the social network. All of that musical activity makes Facebook a smart place to sell tickets. This marks the first time users will be able to buy show tickets on a Facebook artist page without being funneled to an external site, such as Ticketmaster, says Ticketfly, which was a Facebook Connect launch partner. Artists (or their people) install the app on their Facebook artist pages, where it relies on Facebook Connect log-ins to authenticate users. If the band (or whoever else controls the app) activates its “Facebook purchase amplifier,” and you buy a ticket, your friends can find about it, perhaps to join you at the show or catch the same band somewhere else. “It took a couple of minutes to load the purchase app,” said Eboni Jones, who does marketing and communications for Parish Entertainment Group, a beta partner of the service. “When you use the Ticketfly marketing tool’s ‘Facebook Purchase Amplifier,’ your ticket sales definitely increase — and you leave it to the fans.” “The fans help sell tickets, which pretty much frees you up to work on other aspects of your business,” she continues in the above video (via Ticketfly). “We’ve been able to sell tickets out and we’re just able to manage our inventory a heck of a lot better.” This news comes on the heels of a big acquisition of consumer analysis firm BigChampagne by ticketing and promotion behemoth Live Nation Entertainment of the media. Like Ticketfly’s new Facebook integration, this purchase will almost certainly help Live Nation Entertainment (formerly Ticketmaster and Live Nation) sell more tickets by understanding what people are up to online. “This acquisition strengthens our commitment to be the leader in Artist-to-Fan data,” said Live Nation Entertainment CEO Michael Rapino in a statement. “BigChampagne’s expertise will accelerate our mission to drive deeper fan engagement throughout Live Nation driven by world class data technology.” Meanwhile, Ian Hogarth, CEO of Spotify’s launch partner, Songkick, told us that he anticipates a boost in his company’s generation of ticket leads to sellers such as Live Nation and Ticketfly. “What’s so exciting to me is the level of seamlessness,” said Hogarth. “In a single click, Songkick will scan all the music in your Spotify playlist and build you a personalized calendar [from] every single concert in your city.” Spotify, of course, was the biggest launch partner of Facebook’s new music initiative… which also relies on Facebook Connect. The future of ticket sales is already happening. It’s all about promoters knowing what you like based on the music you, and everyone you know, and everyone else, are listening to; pushing tickets through friends and artist pages over social networks you’re already using to share cat pictures and political statements; and, if all goes as planned, selling even more tickets when your friends see all the fun you’re planning. Regardless of what fans might think of sharing their ticket purchases with friends, or having listening habits used to pitch stuff, this can only be a great thing for artists, who notoriously rely much more on box office receipts than they used to. As for music fans, once again, social butterflies — the people who are most comfortable with sharing activities and watching their friends’ activities — stand to benefit the most, as the market shapes itself around their habits.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Most entrepreneurs found companies to solve a problem. Adam Archer founded GamesThatGive to save the world. During a backpacking trip across the world he was inspired with the idea for the company. He then left Apple in 2008 to work on a farm before founding GamesThatGive, which builds social games where users earn money for charity by playing thanks to sponsorships from major brands. It raised a little over $1 million dollars before selling to Facebook Page management platform Vitrue earlier this year. Watch as we talk to Archer about the challenges and advantages of starting a social good company, and how one can make a difference in the world and still turn a profit. Here’s Archer’s top 8 tips for entrepreneurs. Some are common sense or often cited, but it’s always good to remind yourself: Latest headlines delivered to you daily GoChime, a graduate of the 2011 TechStars Seattle program, is today announcing that it has raised $630,000 from a host of entrepreneurs and angel investors that include Geoff Entress, who has invested in companies like Hootsuite and Cheezburger, Walter Winshall, an investor in Harmonix (Guitar Hero), Co-founder of Feedburner and former Googler, Matt Shobe, Dave Carlson (investor in Socialthing, Daily Burn), and Founder and CEO of Bigdoor Keith Smith — to name a few. What is GoChime? Simply put, the startup is delivering relevant offers to people based on real needs they’ve expressed across their social media profiles. In other words, it’s direct marketing for social, something which GoChime Co-founders Matt Walters, Josh Emert, and Austin Evarts are convinced has not yet been done successfully. Seeing that millions of people express the desire for products and services on social media every day, whether that be for a Android phone, a vacation, or help studying for the GMAT. They experess these desires to their friends, followers, and really, the public domain. GoChime wants to eliminate the need for every day users to have to search Google for products or solutions by making use of the reams of commercial intent data available on social networks, in turn providing customers with value by saving them time and money.  Thus, GoChime wants to enable brainds to effectively come to the rescue of these potential customers by offering promotions and offers that are contextually relevant to the needs these people have already expressed — delivered to them by their existing customers and fans. GoChime matches each desire expressed with products or solutions provided by the corresponding brands when and if that expression is contextually relevant. GoChime matches relevant brand promotions in its database and passes it off to brand loyalists, who then decide if the expression is relevant to the matched promotion. Those that aren’t relevant are skipped, and those that fit the bill are then used by the brand evangelists to start a conversation with the person, with the incentive of a discount, coupon, etc. being dangled in front of that potential customer. Chimers are graded by a “reputation score”, based on “professionalism, information sufficiency, and relevancy”, according to the GoChime Co-founders. Giving its users the chance to interact on behalf of the brand, the service then allows those with the best scores to stand out as the top social media brand influencers, presumably going on to well-paying jobs in marketing at their favorite brands.  The startup wants to provide and environment in which those people with an “innate skill for engaging with other people on social media” facilitate the connection between companies and their potential customers. By delivering the right promotion at the right time (presumably to the right person), GoChime thinks that it can play a part in defining the new economy that is emerging on social. The Co-founders say that, so far, they’ve seen CTRs and conversion rates that far exceed traditional advertising options, and are convinced that they’re onto something.  The startup is still working out its business model, but you can get a sense of where this is going. If GoChime can connect brands with top social media influencers and acquire new customers, then the startup gets paid and, in turn, provides a social service while doing so. Obviously, this model is all about effectively finding the best influencers. It remains to be seen whether its “influence score” is enough of a litmus for brands to seek out those influencers, but it’s yet another social-centric direct marketing alternative to display advertising. Chime in and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily First, the bad news for Buffer. The startup of European expats in San Francisco is being kicked out of the country due to our stupid, self-destructive immigration laws. They’re temporarily relocating to Hong Kong while they try to figure things out. And the good news? The company, which offers a tool for letting you schedule social content sharing over the course of the day and the week, is announcing that it has raised $400,000 in angel funding. Not bad for some guys who showed up in Silicon Valley, as they’ll tell you, with no money or connections. But let’s back up and look at what Buffer does. Let’s say you’re like a lot of other people, and you read most of your news for 15 minutes in the morning, and another 15 at lunch. And let’s say you find ten stories on a given morning that you really think your friends on Facebook or your followers on Twitter are going to want to know about. Instead of blasting everything out to everyone in real-time, Buffer lets you set each article to publish at a different point throughout the day. This will help the content you share get maximum exposure without feeling as spammy to the people reading it.  Who needs to be this thoughtful about sharing? Anyone trying to build up their thought leadership by being a quality filter for information. It’s an especially good fit for marketers. The results so far: 80,000 users a day, including 1,400 paying users who provide a revenue run-rate of around $200,000. Those stats are all up around 10% from a month ago when I talked to the company about its integration with If This Then That. The Buffer interface includes a variety of options for setting the service to share to, the time you want the content shared, which stories are pending, and more. The company also recently added a Chrome extension where you can Buffer any articles you’re reading, or any tweet you see on Twitter.com, while browsing. It also has a widget for web sites, that a number of social media bloggers have integrated. Like other share buttons, it lets you share — back to Buffer, automatically scheduled for sharing.  So why is the company raising money? Cofounder Leonhard Widrich tells me that it’s to hire faster (the common story these days for growing startups) as well as to bring in the network of some 19 angel investors who are providing the funding.  Overall, the product fits a need that a growing number of people have. (Although I admittedly don’t because I’m either spamming you all with my content in real-time, or I’m scheduling it to post WordPress.). The company has put together a little more about each of their new investors, and how they met. Here’s an excerpt about one of them. Guy Kawasaki – Author of Enchantment and Co-Founder of Alltop Here is another crazy story for you. Joel wrote a most complete guide on how he went from idea to paying customer within 7 weeks. Guy found and liked the story. He posted it to Google Plus. I got in touch and thanked him for posting it. At the same time, Daniel Brusilovsky had connected us with the founders of Evernote. Evernote invited us to attend their conference in San Francisco to chat with us about potentially collaborating. At this conference, Guy Kawasaki was the keynote speaker. We caught him after it and showed him Buffer. He liked it a lot and we started chatting about future ideas and what his thoughts are. After this, we kept in touch and he linked us up with more people, gave us more ideas and is now a full advisor to Buffer. Crazy eh? Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInHands On With The 4Moms Origami StrollerWhen I first saw the 4moms Origami stroller, I knew it would be a hit. It’s a robotic stroller that unfolds like the Autobots getting ready to roll out and has one of the nicest interfaces I’ve ever seen on a stroller (which is saying a lot). Why did it make me so excited? Well, first this stroller will beat the pants off any of those feature-rich Stokkes or Buzzes out there. Pull this thing out on the playground and you are the true Ninja Parent. Bugaboo? Whatever. My kid is riding Optimus Prime. I’m pleased to report that the buggy is as cool as it looks on video. The one-handed operation is seamless and incredibly satisfying and the fun LCD readout – complete with trip meter, battery level, and external temperature sensor – is just icing on the cake. 4moms is a small company based in Pittsburgh that is making a go of entering the entrenched baby market where Maclaren and Bugaboo are able to make money hand over fist while simply swapping out the seat colors. I’m glad to see some investment in stroller technology and it’s a fascinating product on many levels. I can’t review this completely right now as my wife will give birth to our newest test subject in March but from our initial tests we found the seat was a bit small for kids 3 years and older (the little girl in the video wasn’t quite comfortable). In terms of handling the buggy corners and takes bumps like a champ and an optional car seat adapter makes it good for the littlest ones. Also, to be clear, there is no way your child will get smashed inside this thing. A sensor disables the closing motor when there is any weight at all in the seat. There are a few problems, however. First, the Origami is heavy. 4moms has assuaged this a bit by adding a small central wheel on the main front hub that allows you to drag this around like a suitcase. However, lifting it is a chore, even if you have both hands free. There is clearly a lot of gearing in the front to make this work, so I can excuse it to a degree, but don’t plan on toting it around for very long. This buggy is designed to assist moms and dads who need to hold a crying baby and fold up their buggy at the same time. To that end it performs admirably, if not magically. However, I wouldn’t recommend this for a long sprint down an airport hallway nor would I suggest it get mixed in with the luggage on a flight. Then there’s the price. At $850 it’s on par with some of the fancier strollers out there but it’s still wildly expensive when compared to an umbrella stroller or the like. My recommendation would be to hit up the rich grandparents. In the end, these strollers are very cool, have a fairly strong resale value in the Baby Supply Gray Market every parent knows about, and the technology is impressive. Would I recommend it to a general buggy buyer? If you drive a lot and need to get in and out of the car as easily is possible, this thing would be a godsend. If you’re in a walking neighborhood, however, I feel that this might be a bit of overkill, especially at the price. However, if you just want to smoke other parents in the endless stroller arms race, you really can’t go wrong. Product Page Latest headlines delivered to you daily CrowdStar, a social gaming company that got its start on Facebook, has been steadily pushing into mobile over the last year, with improving results. Today, it’s trying to drive that point home by announcing that its latest game, Social Girl, has reached a million downloads and reached #6 overall on iOS since launching a week ago. That’s good for the company, sure, but the better news is how its overall mobile efforts have gone to date. I spoke with chief executive Peter Relan earlier today to hear more about it all. He’s one of the most publicly opinionated executives in the social gaming industry. Here’s the latest from on social, mobile, and expansion into Asia. TechCrunch: So tell me about this year. You started out mostly on Facebook, but now you’re focused elsewhere — even though you still have more than a million daily active users on Facebook [according to AppData]. Peter Relan: We’ve seen a pretty dramatic uptick in mobile social gaming this year, to the extent that 50% of revenues now come from mobile. That’s because we got two big hits: top girl and social girl. To be clear, we’re exiting with 50% of our revenue runway coming from mobile, but not for the calendar year. Mobile social gaming — free games that monetize through virtual goods — is probably going to make almost $500 million this year.  TechCrunch: That’s basically what the latest Inside Virtual Goods report says [see our previous coverage]. Can you tell me how that breaks down for you? How is Android doing? Peter Relan: With Android, Top Girl is doing pretty well but we haven’t scaled it up yet. Everything I hear suggests that there’s something like $100 million coming in to free-to-play games on Android. The rest is iOS. The thing about Android is obviously monetization. For example, on the Kindle Fire we’re already seeing much better numbers — average revenue per user, and the rest — even if it’s small. The thing about Android is that it’s sold by the telcos for free or cheap, almost like feature phones in terms of users. So compared to the iPhone, demographically, the wealthier audience is there versus the Android. TechCrunch: But it’s not just audience, it’s how Google does payments, right? What do you want to see change? Peter Relan: I would like android to accelerate direct carrier billing. Google checkout and wallet — that’s a very long term strategic initiative, but not likely to take off on a mobile device because they’re just behind. Amazon already has 150 million credit cards on file, Apple has hundreds of millions. Android needs to leverage carrier billing very, very aggressively. Especially for things like free-to-play virtual goods. They’re in-app. As the user is playing along, they’ll hit a point where they want to buy virtual goods. If you make the payment easy, they’ll keep paying. But if you the user have to go off and do five things, if you don’t have an account, you won’t buy. That’s not the same for free games that make money on advertising, of course. TechCrunch: What about Facebook’s latest mobile launch? How is that going for you? Peter Relan: We haven’t heard or seen that much traction in terms of gaming, which I attribute to the fact that HTML5 games, which they’re supporting, are relatively immature as a technology. You can’t suddenly take people who have learned to build native client games on Objective C and Java and have them go build with fewer options. It just lacks the supply of high-quality games. Changing to focus on HTML5 requires massive tech and workflow adjustments. Facebook is taking a long-term strategic directional initiative, which developers have to compare to the here-and-now money initiative. TechCrunch: How are you adapting? You still have a significant business on Facebook, but that’s not where you launched this game. Peter Relan: The biggest transformation has been our Project Trident strategy. So you can play anywhere, anytime. That’s our vision now. There are times where I’m simply not on Facebook or on mobile devices — China and Japan. Our games don’t rely on Facebook in those places. At this point we’re looking at Facebook as one of three platforms versus the main platform, the other two being mobile platforms, and non-Facebook social platforms in Asia. We’ll look at every Facebook game we consider building, and compare to opportunities to build social games on mobile or launch social in other markets That’s been a change over the past year from our default-Facebook position in 2010. Zynga is the main other company that has been making this type of move to focus on multiple platforms. TechCrunch: Game developers have talked over the years about creating a unified gaming experience, where you take your identity with you across platforms. Do people actually want that? Peter Relan: We have both options in many of our games, but we find that actually it isn’t necessarily that the social graphs are shared right now. We do allow players to play on mobile using iOS using their Facebook identities. What we’ve found is that the large majority actually prefer their mobile social graph. That’s part of why we changed to Top Girl from It Girl. I think it was do with what mobile is — more about your virtual identity, like dragonslayer482 or whatever your online identity is. In Japan it’s also a lot more about users’ virtual identity. That’s one of the reasons that Facebook has not done well in Japan. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startup founders are the new reality TV stars. No, really! Today, the exec producer of the TechStars TV show on Bloomberg TV, Cameron Casey, is announcing his plans to film a second startup-focused reality show. This time, the show will follow a group of entrepreneurs out in L.A., courtesy of a partnership with the Start Engine accelerator. But here’s the big news: this time, the show is planned as a multi-season series for a network. The TechStars reality show was apparently successful enough for Casey to give the format another shot. The producer is still shopping the show around to networks, however – there’s no distribution deal in place as of yet. But based on the success of TechStars, word is they’re very confident that a deal will be signed soon. And it will be for a five-year run to start, they say. The documentary-style program will follow the entrepreneurs enrolled in Start Engine, the L.A.-based incubator founded by Howard Marks, co-founder of Activision, and investor Paul Kessler, founder of the Los Angeles Film School. Start Engine is a rapid accelerator, offering four 90-day cycles per year, each culminating in the nerve-wracking Demo Day events, where the founders pitch a roomful of top angel investors and VCs. At Start Engine, the goal is to launch over 100 companies per year, with sessions that include around 30 companies each. According to Kessler, this incubator is different because of its focus on the entrepreneurs. “This is the first effort on a really large scale that’s not driven by VC’s, but by the entrepreneurial spirit,” he says. He points to the program’s large line-up of mentors, as an example of that. Around fifty are on the Start Engine website, but many more are not. As for the companies themselves, teams (not individuals) are preferred and one on the team should be the technical co-founder. The founders are bright, well-educated and the experience of watching them go through the program should be inspiring to other entrepreneurs, says Kessler. Casey approached Start Engine around 30 days ago about the idea, and Kessler  immediately recognized the opportunity to showcase L.A.’s entrepreneurial talent via this show. “We were big fans of TechStars on Bloomberg TV,” he says, “so we’re excited to be partnering with Cameron to shine a spotlight on how innovation is created here in the City of Angels where the media, technology and entertainment industries converge.” For those of you who watched TechStars, you’ll be familiar with the formula employed by the new show. It will document how entrepreneurs apply, get chosen, the mentoring process and finally, the big pitch. There have been complaints, however, that the “reality-tv-ification” of the startup process led to some inaccuracies which painted some founders in a bad light. According to Casey, the accuracy problem is related to the genre itself. “This is a very challenging TV format to tackle,” he says. “Considering the series was documented in real-time following multiple teams, dozens of characters, and multiple story lines over nearly nine months of filming in total. Some stories may be out of sequence, but we try to tell each story as accurately as possible.” In other words, it may be inaccurate, but it might not be wrong. Hmm? Kessler adds, “there’s always a risk [of a negative portrayal, but I’ll do everything in my power to do things accurately, and protect the companies and the folks associated with those companies.” He also notes that the applicants won’t be required to be on TV – if for some reason a company says they cannot, Start Engine will accommodate that. But that’s a bridge they’ll cross when they come to it. Says Casey, “considering that Start Engine is both a TV series and a exercise in media training and marketing, I would hope that founders would appreciate the value, and jump at the chance of having the birth of their new business documented.” The series will reportedly appear on a network first, then online afterwards, starting sometime in early 2012. Update: Credit where credit is due. We’re hearing that Casey’s involvement was minimal, and that if anyone should get credit for TechStars’ production it should be Bloomberg’s Elizabeth Gould, the show’s producer. Casey reports he was in charge of hiring the crew and payroll, however. With regards to “executive producer” and “producer,” the bigger title isn’t always the bigger job.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily About a month after its iOS debut, the self-described “Twitter for audio” app Spreaker is now publicly launching Android. The app, which lets users broadcast live over the Internet, is a DIY broadcasting/podcasting solution with social sharing mechanisms built in. You connect the app to your Twitter and Facebook accounts to broadcast live as a status update. Afterwards, you can download the MP3 created to publish it as a proper podcast complete with music and sound effects. The Spreaker app is unique in that it streams audio in 128 kilobits and includes features like live chat and Skype call-in, in addition to social sharing. There’s also an online web platform that lets you edit the recording, insert sound effects and add background music from a library of pre-licensed content. The finished podcasts can then be downloaded as MP3 files or you can use the  iTunes-compatible RSS feed to syndicate elsewhere.  The freemium service offers two paid levels (Gold and Premium) starting at $19.90. These provide more storage, bandwidth and air time while also eliminating ads. The free version is monetized through Spreaker’s ad partners. Spreaker reminds me of an app I toyed with in the past, Cinchcast, which had the similar goals of democratizing access to podcasting. But Cinch has since gone B2B, with a heavy focus on business-level tools like analytics, while pitching its services as ideal for corporate communications, meetings and events, marketing, e-learning and the like. Spreaker, however, is meant to be a consumer-facing service. Podcasts, sadly, are often the forgotten child in the iTunes universe. They’re difficult to monetize for the average user in most cases, and that doesn’t get any easier when they have to compete with the production values of professional content creators. Maybe Spreaker can bring a renewed interest in podcasts. Or maybe no one really finds the average user’s thoughts all that compelling? The new Android app is available here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When design marketplace Brandstack was shuttered last month (with the founder blaming credit card fraud), we figured that was the end of the story. Little did I know things were about to go all M. Night Shyamalan with a last minute plot twist. DesignCrowd, an Australian design crowdsourcing platform that raised $3 million last month, has just announced that they’ve acquired Brandstack and will integrate it into their service (essentially rescuing Brandstack from the deadpool.) DesignCrowd has just relaunched the product as BrandCrowd, with each leg of the company offering a slightly different service. With DesignCrowd, anyone looking for a design (be it a logo, web layout, business cards, whatever) can create a project request and set a budget while designers make bids and pitch their work. With BrandCrowd, designers offer up their pre-made designs (often brands paired with domain names) for pre-set prices. Same end goal (designers sell, users get designs), differing approaches. In the new year, DesignCrowd says they plan to integrate the two services more closely. Neither company is revealing the exact details of the acquisition, but I’m hearing that the final price is somewhere in the six-figure range. That may not be mansion and yacht money, but it’s a whole lot better than closing the doors and walking away empty handed. Making the news even better: in what they call an “immediate gesture of goodwill”, DesignCrowd is repaying all of the Brandstack designers who went unpaid when the site was suddenly and unexpectedly shut down. It’s a happy ending for everyone! Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInCharity: Water’s ShareholdersAs the founder of Charity: Water, Scott Harrison has overseen substantial growth since launching his non-profit five years ago. He tells Founder Stories host, Chris Dixon that since 2006 Charity: Water has raised “about $50-million” and “helped 2-million people” gain access to clean water. However, just eighteen months in things were a bit rocky. Harrison says the organization was dangerously off-balance and was “going to run out of money in five weeks.” Donors were supplying his non-profit with cash, but earmarking it specifically for water projects. Funding for staff was bone dry. At the 11th hour, something unexpected happened. Bebo, founder Michael Birch and his wife agreed to meet with Harrison. Harrison says Birch “absolutely shocked me two days later by wiring a million bucks to the account with a kind of note, you know saying, here build the business.” And build he has – Harrison says Charity: Water has grown at “100% this year in a tough economy” but points out, “no one who works at Charity: Water is motivated by money.” He adds, “our shareholders [are] 8-year old school children in Bangladesh who aren’t in school because they’ve gotta get water for 4 hours in the morning and then do it again in the afternoon, so that keeps us going.” Make sure to watch this entire video to hear more of Harrison’s insights and be sure to catch-up on episode I of this interview here. Episode III is coming up. Past Founder Stories interviews featuring Mayor Bloomberg, Billy Chasen, Kevin O’Conner, Kevin Ryan and many other founders are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Remember Brightkite? Launched with the help of TechStars back in August 2007, the location-based ‘check-in’ service once rivaled the likes of Foursquare and Gowalla, but never really got the traction it needed to keep on competing and win the day: the startup killed the check-in functionality about a year ago to focus on group texting. It’s been quiet about Brightkite ever since, and the company’s two founders moved on long before the pivot to group texting was announced, starting a new venture dubbed Forkly (our review). Now, a reader tells us, it appears Brightkite (which remained the name even after their 2009 merger with Limbo) is changing course again. The company’s mobile apps are no longer available on the App Store or Android Market, and the website displays only a logo and this not super-reassuring text: This is not goodbye… we’re just moving on to something better.Watch this space. We have an update coming soon. I hate to say it, but can’t resist the pun: looks like the future isn’t going to be Brightkite. I’d get in touch with Brightkite to see what’s up and if we can deadpool them yet, but I frankly don’t know who could answer that question, or how to contact anyone at the company for that matter. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In case you haven’t noticed, it’s a new, new Twitter world out there and we’re just living in it. The new Twitter interface is very, for lack of a better word, “appy” and although the desktop apps are abysmal, the website is pretty strong and interesting. This week Erick and I take a closer look at this improvement and assess its value in our lives. Changing a web interface is a big deal and it seems that companies are no longer squeamish about mixing things up. It’s interesting, as well, to see Twitter head towards the tablet-style interface as more and more Tweeters head off the desktop and go mobile. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Is healthcare the industry that represents the next big opportunity for startups? Many are starting to believe it is, especially considering the fact that U.S. healthcare is currently a $2 trillion business. With technology beginning to play an increasingly vital role in healthcare and the health industry, disruption of legacy systems and an in-with-the-new approach has come to the fore for entrepreneurs looking for big opportunities in areas where they can add some serious real-world value. And what better way to help jumpstart these new health businesses than with business accelerators focused solely on healthcare? Bring them on, we say. Rock Health is off to a good start with its health-focused accelerator, announcing its second batch of killer startups last week. And now Chicago-based Sandbox Industries is launching its own health-y startup accelerator, calledHealthbox. Healthbox is set to launch its three-month accelerator program on January 9, 2012 and will be seeding the 10 companies it has chosen from over 200 applications with $50,000 equity investments (for a 7 percent stake). The 10 teams will share space and collaborate at the accelerator’s headquarters in Chicago, where they will be given access to an expert network of entrepreneurs, investors, and experts, a collaborative workspace, as well as forums led by these experts and investors, geared towards educating startups on partnerships, product development, and so on. Like Y Combinator, TechStars, and others before it, Healthbox’s program will culminate with an “Investor Day”, where startups will have the opportunity to pitch their businesses to a targeted group of health-focused investors. Healthbox has already forged industry-specific partnerships with providers like BlueCross Blue Shield, as well as with foundations and venture firms like California HealthCare Foundation, HLM Venture Partners, and corporations like Walgreens. So, without further ado, here is a brief introduction to the first 10 startups that will be taking part in Healthbox’s inaugural batch: PUSH Wellness (Chicago) is an outcomes-based wellness incentive provider that drives behavior change in health factors that are meaningful, measurable and modifiable, producing tangible benefits for participants and employers. PaJR-Patient Journey Record (Dublin) uses a cloud-based system with machine learning capabilities to identify patients at high risk of re-admission using patient and caregiver self-reported health status. SwipeSense (Evanston) is hand-washing 2.0, arming healthcare providers with a portable hand-sanitation device in combination with realtime data analytics in order to increase compliance and reduce hospital-acquired infections. CareWire (Minneapolis) is a patient engagement solution that utilizes automated patient text messaging to increase billable appointment yield, visualize patient satisfaction in near-real-time, and improve provider performance. The Coupon Doc (Atlanta) provides an easy-to-use, centralized platform that allows consumers to access manufacturer discounts on their prescription and OTC medications. Corengi (Seattle) connects qualified patients with ongoing clinical research studies through a comprehensive online platform. Patients are able to quickly distill relevant studies, trial sponsors are able to reduce costly delays and medical innovation is accelerated. Iconic Data (Georgia) delivers a cloud-based patient list manager solution that provides physicians access to near-real-time snapshots of clinical care episodes across disparate, non-integrated facilities, resulting in increased charge capture and reduced inefficiencies. UnitedPreference (Princeton) offers employers a Tailored Spend™ payments network that allows health plans to improve participation in preventative health initiatives via branded prepaid cards that can be used to purchase items determined by the health plans. DermLink (Atherton) is a cloud-based, HIPAA-compliant application that enables remote diagnosis of dermatology cases, dramatically reducing wait times for patients while driving increased revenue and flexibility for providers. CareHubs (Oregon) is a healthcare enterprise social platform that offers dynamic, innovative tools to help patients and healthcare providers better connect, coordinate and engage. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In what Vlingo CEO Dave Grannan calls a ‘good outcome’ on Twitter, the voice-to-text technology company has just been acquired by speech recognition king Nuance.  Notably, Nuance has repeatedly sued Vlingo over patent infringement – and tried to acquire them – in the past, and Grannan once referred to competing with Nuance as “having a venereal disease that’s in remission”.  Vlingo even bought patents and eventually countersued Nuance to fend them off. Anyway, the deal is done: Nuance is buying the company for an undisclosed sum, and says it allows them to combine their innovation and R&D expertise in the field of natural language interfaces. Vlingo has been likened by some as a ‘Siri for Android’, offering voice-enabled Virtual Assistant apps for a wide range of mobile devices (not just Android phones but also Nokia, iPhone, BlackBerry and Windows Phone handsets) that turn spoken words into a variety of actions. For what it’s worth, Vlingo says it’s way better than Siri. And the elephant in the room is of course that Siri is almost certainly powered by Nuance technology. And that Nuance offers Dragon Go. Founded in 2006, Vlingo was backed by Charles River Ventures, Sigma Partners, Yahoo and AT&T. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInHands-On With The SwivlWe saw an early version of Swivl a month or so ago and the $159 device is now ready to ship. It’s basically a camera dock with a twist. Instead of holding your camera still, the Swivl will follow you around the room, tracking you as you move around on stage or in front of an audience. Why is it good? Well, it keeps the camera on you at all times and, more important, you can control the swivel speed and tilt using a small hand-held remote, thereby turning you into a one-man (or one-woman) film crew. Swivl’s utility, while limited to a few specific use cases, is quite impressive. It can, for example, record on-stage presentations with ease, following you from one side of the stage to the other with aplomb. It can also grab tracking shots at multiple speeds, from slow to lightning fast.  The kit is shipping soon and is available for pre-order now. They are working on a number of improvements including a computer controlled system that will allow you to program motions into the Swivl, allowing for clever pans and tilts. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Silicon Valley-based database infrastructure software maker ScaleArc has secured $5.33 million in its second round of institutional funding, which was led by Trinity Ventures, with earlier backer Nexus Venture Partners participating. In addition, ScaleArc announced the appointment of Justin Barney, who previously ran sales divisions at companies like Citrix and Juniper Networks, as president and COO.  ScaleArc’s iDB software, which is available for MySQL, SQL Server, Oracle and Postgres database environments, offers real-time query analytics and control, instant horizontal scaling, caching, dynamic load balancing and more, all without any changes to existing applications or databases.  ScaleArc customers include e-commerce, SaaS, online gaming and digital media companies. Latest headlines delivered to you daily StartApp, a newly launched monetization and distribution platform for Android applications, has now been installed in over 450 mobile applications, the company is announcing today. You may remember StartAp from its September launch – it’s the one that bundles a “search” icon with the Android app download which is installed directly to a user’s homescreen. When the user taps the icon to perform a web search, it takes them to StartApp’s portal, instead of Google.com (or whatever their preferred search service may be). StartApp then shares the revenue generated from the searches with app’s developer. Icky, but apparently successful. The company’s search option has now been downloaded 10 million times and has paid out $200,000 to developers in the four months since its launch. During that time, StartApp says it has been seeing ever-increasing downloads, and is now reaching 300,000 downloads per day.  Developers using StartApp receive an upfront payment for their free apps, where they’ll receive $10-$50 per 1,000 downloads, depending on location. Alternately, they can choose to share the revenue generated by the search option on an ongoing basis. Says Gil Dudkiewicz, StartApp’s CEO, “we have received overwhelmingly positive feedback from our partners, many of whom have seen dramatic increases in the revenue they are receiving from their apps.” One has to wonder what the apps’ users would have to say. With the $200,000 payout, some developers are claiming their revenue has increased by a factor of 10, notes Dudkiewicz.   StartApp is working, it seems, but if this is what it takes for a mobile platform to help developers get paid, it’s no wonder why developers are still flocking to iOS.  StartApp is a Cedar Fund-backed company based in Israel founded by Gil Dudkiewicz and Ran Avidan.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily eRecyclingCorps, whose mission is to alleviate the pain of wireless e-waste, has landed $35 million in financing in a round led by Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. Co-founded by David Edmondson, the former CEO of RadioShack, and Ron LeMay, former CEO of Sprint PCS, eRecyclingCorps works with retailers and carriers like Sprint and Verizon to turn e-waste into an asset.  The company, which was founded in 2009, helps carriers and distributors run incentivized wireless device trade-in and recycling programs, powered by an instant in-store credit solution and a Web-based platform that integrates into the point-of-sale systems at retail stores. This helps carriers, in their words, “overcome logistics and execution barriers to entry” when it comes to setting up and managing recycling processes. The pitch, straight from the company’s website: Our approach is simple: recognize the value of these devices, offer incentives in exchange/trade, and establish a global after-market to support the reuse of wireless phones. eRecyclingCorps is pioneering the establishment of large-scale wireless phone buy-back programs in a way that is highly scalable yet also recognizes the unique needs of companies and their customers. eRecyclingCorps believes that by transforming the wireless device ecosystem into an opportunity for reward, renewal and reuse, we’re not only benefiting the environment, but creating an economic opportunity that rewards everyone who participates. According to the company, more than 130 million mobile devices are ‘retired’ each year in the United States alone, but only 10 percent gets recycled. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Leiyoo, a Chinese developer of HTML5 mobile and browser-based games, has raised an undisclosed amount of capital in a Series A funding round led by VC firm WI Harper Group and joined by the recently established Innovation Works Development Fund. Leiyoo, which is headquartered in the Chaoyang district in Beijing, says it owns ‘key patents’ in HTML5 development, specializing in online games for mobile devices based on the standard. The company offers both game developers and players multiple services, and is currently developing a platform for games and gaming social networks based on HTML5, dubbed “Duopao”.  Leiyoo also co-founded the first open organization in China that promotes the growth and usage of HTML5 alongside Google, Shanda, Tencent and other enterprises and developers. Also read: WI Harper, Matrix Partners Invest $12.5 Million In Social Games Maker SNS Plus Latest headlines delivered to you daily Amazon has acquired a minority stake in Ciceksepeti, which operates an online flower and gifts store in Turkey. Founded by CEO Emre Aydin in 2006, the company delivers flowers, jewelry, gourmet products, toys and other gifts to customers across the country, including same-day deliveries in most metropolitan areas. Headquartered in Istanbul, CicekSepeti currently employs 160 people. The minority investment of the American online retail juggernaut is subject to customary regulatory approvals in Turkey. Financial terms of the investment were not disclosed. Ciceksepeti earlier raised funding from Belgium-based early stage investor Hummingbird Ventures. As I wrote earlier, Turkey is a red hot market for e-commerce and other digital companies, and investors – and increasingly, large acquirers – are taking notice.  Over the summer, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Tiger Global invested between $25 million and $30 million in private shopping site Trendyol, and Swedish investment company Quants Financial Services recently bought a majority stake in Grupfoni. Another interesting startup – among many others – in Turkey that has raised funding from top-tier European VCs is social gaming company Peak Games. (Hat tip to our friends at Webrazzi) Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cornell University has won the bid to build the big new technology campus on Roosevelt Island that New York City has been looking to create. The plan is to foster a strong technology ecosystem by bringing in lots of talented technical people and have them focus on building innovative businesses on top of the traditional industries in the city. So I got on the phone with Daniel Huttenlocher after the press conference in New York earlier today, to get some more details about what his university is aiming to accomplish. As the dean of the Faculty of Computing and Information Science (CIS), and a distinguished computer science professor at the University, he’s been in the middle of the effort to get the new campus. In the extensive interview below, he provides more details on the types of students that the school will be looking for, and how he sees it adding to the development of a strong technology ecosystem in the city. As he explains, no one fully understands what makes an ecosystem form, but good technical schools are clearly a component — that New York could use more of. Huttenlocher has the right background for the job ahead. His research spans computer vision, autonomous vehicles, social networking communication, and software development management. He has 22 patents and more than 50 published papers. He’s also been involved with a few tech companies throughout his career. You can find out more about him here.  Officially called the NYCTech Campus, the facilities will be a joint effort with Technion-Israel Institute of Technology. The plan is to begin moving in by 2017, and finish constructing 1.3 million of the 2 million square foot facility by 2027. In 20 years or so, the campus is expected to have 2,500 students and 280 professors. The expectations are high, and reflect the city’s efforts to iterate beyond its traditional industries like finance and advertising. A new study by New York City projects that the campus will generate above $23 billion in economic activity, along with $1.4 billion in tax revenue over the coming 30 years. In terms of job creation, construction will account for 20,000 near-term jobs, and the campus will provide 8,000 permanent ones. The study also estimates that some 600 companies will be spun out, that create another 30,000 jobs. To boost all of this, the campus will also introduce a $150 million fund for New York City startups. (Official announcement here, and more campus images here.) TechCrunch: Now that the deal is finalized, can you tell me more about the steps Cornell is taking to help New York’s tech ecosystem? Daniel Huttenlocher: Any successful tech ecosystem in any city has its own characteristics. There’s already a fairly vibrant one in New York but it’s “adolescent” in the sense that it’s not at the scale of Silicon Valley or even Seattle or Boston. But there’s definitely a lot here. Our approach is to take what we think is unique and look at what kind of role we can play. In terms of the unique parts of the ecosystem, the tech world is undergoing major shifts. Historically, the new technologies that have driven things have been pure tech plays. Increasingly, the value of tech is not coming as much from the pure tech side, and much more from people who deeply understand who to take it and transform something. Amazon is my favorite example. It’s a tech company and a retailer, and you can’t separate the two. In New York City, that’s really the huge advantage — the presence of all these other industries. TechCrunch: Can you tell me more specifically how Cornell’s academic programs are going to be playing a part in all this? Daniel Huttenlocher: Academically, we’re looking at shifting away from traditional university campus disciplines. There’ll be key disciplines involved — computer science, electrical engineering, operations research, applied math — but those disciplines need to be in the context of other disciplines where tech is being applied…. hubs that combine tech and other fields. In media, for instance, there are relevant areas of the social sciences, like sociology and psychology. It’s about building interdisciplinary groupings that focus on these domains — Connective Media, Healthier Life, and the Built Environment. That second one isn’t just health care, but things like lifestyle types of apps. The third is about smart building technology, green buildings. If you look at startup companies in New York, there’s certainly media. That’s a big, active area in the city’s economy. For health, you’re seeing some startups there. But I’d say it’s the leading edge of the startup world. Then with green tech, that’s the bleeding edge, and there are relatively few companies. There’s a lot of growth potential in all these areas from a jobs perspective, and we see the academic areas that support them are not pure tech. The degrees offered — masters and PhDs — will require students to apply to the New York campus, based mainly on their interests in terms of faculty and programs. They’ll have significant entrepreneurship and business requirements. Students need to be interested in that. For those who want pure tech, there’s Ithaca [Cornell’s home campus]. The faculty is also going to be a mix of those only in the city and some who are spending time on each campus. I’m personally spending a lot of time in the city and may end up there. One of the defining features is that students will have mentors. There are 50,000 alumni in the New York, with a significant portion in businesses where tech is playing an increasingly important role. Each students will have a local mentor working in business just like a student on a campus has a faculty advisers. We want students to come up with new ways of thinking based on things they’ve learned very recently, that have commercial potential. TechCrunch: What have you learned from already having the medical college in New York? Daniel Huttenlocher: It really helped give us confidence in the practicality of all of this. The number of faculty who own joint appointments in both places, that have labs in both places — we realized we could do the same for technical fields. We’re also operating other large academic institutions in New York City, and we’re experienced with other aspects — constructing buildings, fundraising, etc. When talking to the mayor [Michael Bloomberg], one of the big components is that we’d have an academic vision tailored to the city. Our alumni are also unbelievably supportive of it. [Deputy Mayor for Economic Development Robert K. Steel] has joked that out of our 50,000 local alumni, most have called him already to encourage the deal. TechCrunch: Do you know why Stanford pulled out? Daniel Huttenlocher: While this all turned in to a competition — at least to some people — every school that’s participated is great. It’s about finding the right match, not about which is better. I have a lot of really good friends at Stanford. And they may also end up here some day. TechCrunch: How are you going to define success in terms of the New York innovation ecosystem? It’s not always obvious how academic work translates to new companies. And looking at Silicon Valley, it wasn’t just Stanford that made the place what it is — there were people experimenting with radio in the 20s, and the semiconductor industry in the 50s. Daniel Huttenlocher: I know quite a bit about that. I worked at Xerox PARC in the late 80s and early 90s. What’s interesting about tech in Silicon Valley is that a lot of innovation comes outside of some corporate entities. Xerox, Fairchild Semiconductor and Paypal have all been incredible cauldrons of innovation, with literally dozens of companies spinning out of each. What causes those things to happen? I don’t think anybody understands yet. Some of it comes from having the right universities around. Some of it comes from companies. The whole ecosystem creation process is, frankly, very poorly understood. What we think is clearly absent in New York City right now is enough of the right kind of engineering talent. Everyone has a hard time hiring good software engineers — in the valley and everywhere else. New York has that problem much more than elsewhere in the country, it really needs that kind of tech talent. That’s what we view we’ll bring to the table very quickly. Develpoing a vibrant ecosystem comes from having multiple companies at multiple stages of development, and will come from places you don’t expect. [At this point in the phone interview, Huttenlocher is interrupted by his partners at Technion leaving the room, and I overhear them say an appropriate departing line: “now we start the real work.”] TechCrunch: So tell me about classes starting next September. That seems like an aggressive schedule. Daniel Huttenlocher:The plan is to start operating more or less immiediately. We’re starting to look for new [temporary] space, with some leased already, and some possibilities for others. Cornell has a lot of operations in the city already, including the medical college and architecture school. It’ll probably involve leasing additional space. We need to start attracting the good engineering talent, and we need a neutral meeting ground for all of the companies. That’s an important role that Stanford plays in the Valley. It helps people come together outside of the domain of one corporate entity or venture firm. We want to play that role quickly. We’ll start having students down here as soon as we find space, and certainly by the fall. Some of that will depend on admissions and other things that take time. Some students will already be at Cornell, who it’d make sense to bring down and start working with companies. Although, a lot of the young startups in the city already have Cornell engaged with them. I’ve personally had meetings with more than 200 people in the local tech industry in the last few months. So it’s a matter of how do we really start to engage with the companies, and get them hooked up? TechCrunch: Any parting thoughts? Daniel Huttenlocher: Yeah. We’ve gotten ourselves as a world into a place where we’re not creating enough good jobs. This isn’t really just about New York. It’s really about global innovation. Every city has its own flavor, that people identify with, and that helps to create great new companies. I mean, this won’t stop me from spending quality time in Silicon Valley…. If we can get a bunch of tech-oriented cities, that’s good for everyone. Latest headlines delivered to you daily New York City refers to its tech scene as “Silicon Alley,” but now it’s getting a giant new Cornell tech campus… on an island, between Manhattan and Queens. I’m going to leave the naming issue for the locals and share some images from the new campus — which is going to be quite impressive, judging by the few details available in an October article from architecture web site Arch Daily. Beyond the larger goal of making the city more of a tech hub, the focus will be creating a “sustainable landmark” on the 2 mile by .15 mile landmass on the East River, the article explains. A quarter of the 2 million square foot campus will be green space available to the public, while the sun-oriented layout will include the largest solar panel array in the city. That’s not all on the environmental front. There’ll be four acres of geothermal wells, and a 150,000 square foot main academic building with a net-zero energy footprint.  In terms of transportation, the island is also going to be getting some upgrades, with the city already providing $100 million for improvements. Ferries, a tram line, a one-way bridge exit, and a single subway stop are the main ways to get on and off of it now. As The Atlantic explores today, maybe could even be a pedestrian and bicycle bridge to Manhattan? With that, on to the renderings of the new campus by the prestigious architecture firm that Cornell has hired, Skidmore, Owings and Merrill LLP.     And the dreamed-of bike bridge:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily India and U.S.-based mygola is announcing today that it has received $1 million in seed funding from Dave McClure of 500 Startups, Blumberg Capital, and several other angel investors.  With social travel startups popping up every other day, and a bevy of travel resources already firmly planted in a crowded space, what is it about mygola that’s getting McClure and others excited? For starters, the service’s value proposition starts with the fact that it’s built for users who already have specific trip-planning questions in mind. Essentially, it’s a pay-as-you go travel concierge, so you bring your proposed trip to mygola, with specific targeted questions in mind, and the service handles all the logistics (research and bookings) for you. Mygola is going for the 90 percent tech, 10 percent human curation approach, as the startup is in the process of bringing on thousands of travel enthusiasts to make them travel researchers. The startup combines human curation and customer service with a technology platform that aggregates the “entire travel web”, auto-categorizing that wealth of information into deals, events, hotels, sublets, and tips from locals through Foursquare and other social platforms. The paid “mygola Guides” currently numbers in the hundreds, according to Founder and ex-Googler Anshuman Bapna, who are distributed globally and are increasing at a rate of 80 a week. These guides are there help users plan their trips based on the crowdsourced data aggregated from travel sites all over the Web. The service allows users to ask their first question for free, and if you like the answer that mygola gives you, users can tip accordingly. Users will then pay $30 to ask additional questions or have their entire trip planned for them, or they can pay $100 for a year long subscription. Interested in trying out the service? Mygola is providing the first 100 TechCrunch readers with a 50 percent discount for the $30 and $100 plans, using the code “TCLOVE”.  Bapna and team have been referring to their model as the “Robocop for travel”, which gives you a sense of the somewhat quirky approach they’re taking. Relying on real human beings to help you plan your trip, leveraging the best of travel information on the Web, is certainly a refreshing alternative to the many user-generated and crowdsourced travel sites out there, but the startup has an enormous amount of competition, and has a long way to go before it can convince users that paying $30 for their recommendations and bookings is easier and more valuable than doing it themselves. The startup plans to use its new capital to continue hiring its “mygola Guides” and build out its current product. For more, check out the startup at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quora is taking a step beyond Q&A this morning with its latest product launch, boards. Users can now set up their own personal-themed bookmarking boards, sort of like a Pinterest for text-based information. Writes Quora CEO  Adam D’Angelo in a blog post, “As Quora has grown, we’ve learned that people want to read the most interesting content regardless of whether it happens to be in question and answer format or not.” D’Angelo tells me that this shift fits in better with Quora’s new goal, “to connect you with everything you want to know about.” Its old goal was described as “a continuously improving collection of questions and answers.”  Board onboarding (heh) is easy. Users who want to create a board will now see a “Create a board” option at the top right of Quora and on their header dashboard. Anything can be posted to a board, whether it be links to web content like news and video, images, stuff on Quora like Questions and answers or text commentary. Users can post content directly from Quora by clicking on the ‘Repost’ option under every question. Board Owners can add Authors and Followers to a board, as well as pay to add Topics. They can also set up the board in a grid or list format. The most interesting feature of boards, from a utility aspect, is that Authors can set up following granularity to public — i.e. everyone who follows the board Author will see content or limited only board followers. Boards will also now show up on Topics pages, as well as on your personal Quora profile page.  Relevant boards will now show up in Quora’s search bar, and boards you are following will show up in your top navigation bar. As Quora has been dogfooding the feature, some robust boards have already been set up, including “The Fourth Wave” (a feminism related board), “All Things J” (A board for Japan-ophiles), “The Quora Blog” (self-explanatory). I’ve also set up my first board,“Epic Internet Content.” Boards will, D’Angelo and Charlie Cheever hope, cut down on Quora newsfeed clutter, and make it easier for people to curate their Quora experience. But it’s not a pivot says D’Angelo, “We see this as expanding what Quora is. People have their favorite answers. There’s also people who write a lot of stuff and a number of masterpieces. This is a way to bookmark the things that people want to reference a bunch of times.” Cheever tells me that the Board way of bookmarking is one of the most often requested Quora features, “[Think of this as} a response to that feature request, but on steroids.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily What if you could subscribe to your favorite bloggers, writers, and designers, and they would send you a heartfelt gift every three months? You probably wouldn’t enjoy my packages, because I would just send you those small M&Ms packets. And let’s be honest, there’s nothing fun about fun-sized candy. But, in most cases, it would be appealing. This, coupled with the fact that monetizing content has been a slog for digital content producers over the past few years, is why Quarterly has chosen an alternative path: “A subscription service for wonderful things”.  Quarterly is a young startup from LA, founded by Zach Frechette, the former Editor-in-Chief of GOOD Magazine. Basically, Frechette is betting that his startup will be able to leverage that part of us that loves to be part of a community — and loves to receive something in the mail — for good. It goes back to when we, as younguns, used to write letters to our favorite baseball players, checking the mail every day for their response, or waiting for parents or loved ones to send us care packages at summer camp. (Read Zach’s blog post explaining the genesis for Quarterly here.) As Frechette’s background is in design and (editoral) curation, he’s chosen designers and writers to be Quarterly’s initial contributors. The initial list is impressive, including the likes of “Moonwalking with Einstein” author Joshua Foer, The Atlantic Senior Editor Alexis Madrigal, President of the Rhode Island School of Design John Maeda, hilarious tweeter and Mule Design Founder Mike Monteiro, author of The Happiness Project Gretchen Rubin, to name a few. (Check out the full list here.) Each of these authors and designers have been chosen by the Quarterly team, yet as the site grows, Frechette says, subscribers will be able to suggest contributors. Subscribers will pay $25 every quarter (hence the site’s name) to enter the subscription service, and the price of entry will entitle users to receive a package every quarter that will range from consumer products, be they interesting books chosen by your favorite authors to a tube of earth-shattering toothpaste. Shipping is included.  Frechette says, however, that Quarterly is about more than just finding a different pay-for system. It’s not intended to be a one-for-one exchange, it’s about supporting the process of writers and designers, inspiring real connections between package recipients and their creators. We spend an inordinate amount of time connecting with people online, and Quarterly is attempting to find an alternative (and complementary) way for people to connect offline, through curated and unique packages that “while uniquely brilliant in [their] function, will also have a story, and through that story take on new meaning”. In each package, there will be a letter from the contributor, describing the item inside and the thought process that led to them choosing it. To help Quarterly in its mission, the startup is today officially announcing that it has receive a round of seed funding from Craig Shapiro and Collaborative Fund, Behance Co-founder and Pinterest investor Scott Belsky (who is also a Quarterly contributor), CEO of Sugar Inc Brian Sugar, and Co-Head of IDEO NY Ryan Jacoby, along with several other entrepreneurs and angel investors. Shapiro said that his interest in Quarterly results from the fact that he sees the potential for a really strong brand, which blends great design with a great user experience, in the same vein as similarly-focused companies, like Kickstarter, Pinterest, Fab.com, and Skillshare.  I, personally, am inclined to see Quarterly as a suped-up, design-centric Secret Santa service that builds upon old magazine subscription model. The value proposition extends beyond design, and as Quarterly moves forward, it will be moving beyond design to focus more broadly on other consumer verticals. Quality control could be a bit tricky, but with an impressive list of contributors who are known entities in their own right, and with a staff that will expand thanks to this infusion of capital, scaling the business will hopefully become more manageable.  As to how the business is going to make money? For now, Frechette says, Quarterly is operating somewhat like a typical wholesaler, in that they are essentially buying products at a low price and marking them up at sale. Because many designers and authors see this as a unique marketing opportunity and a great way to connect directly with their audience, they are offering their service (and products) for free. And with Quarterly adding a new subscription every 5 minutes, the value certainly seems to be there for contributors — the audience is arriving, and they’re willing to pay. Having only been operating in beta for about three months, the service is still incipient, but it will be interesting to see how it grows as it scales. The more opportunities that Quarterly can provide for consumers and fans to connect with their favorite authors and designers, whether that be through Facebook and Twitter, and learn more about them, the more successful this model will be. For more, check out Quarterly at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nokia played Grinch this year by barring a small, Lapland-based maker of iOS games from a Santa Claus Foundation delegation at Wanda Plaza in Beijing, China. The delegation, consisting of a number of Finnish tech companies, including Nokia, was to show off the best tech Lapland had to offer. The smaller company, Lapland Studio Ltd, created a game called Elf Rescue in honor of the studio’s nearest neighbor, Old St. Nick. The Santa Claus Foundation invited founder Ilkka Immonen to the event where he would be able to show the game to Chinese press.  Immonen bought his ticket and booked a hotel in China. A few days before his trip, he found that his presentation had been cancelled. Why? Because his game only ran on iOS and Nokia didn’t want it to be shown. “I was excited, because as a small company I was told that I had the possibility to be present in press event, talk about our game and also show a video,” says Immonen.  “The Santa Claus Foundation told me that everything is cancelled for me. That was after we had produced all the material, planned and booked everything. I asked these people that what is the problem and they said that I cannot show any of my material, nor talk about my game nor speak to any press, even if I came by myself just to see the presentations. They said ‘You should understand that Nokia will definitely not allow that an iOS game would have a slot.'” Considering Lapland studio is right by the Arctic Circle, it would have been a hoot to have them on the delegation. Lest anyone think he’s joking about living next to Santa, Immonen reported that it is currently -5 degrees Celsius outside his office, which he deemed “not too cold.” Immonen isn’t upset, just bemused that Nokia pulled his presentation. He suspects that the Foundation was paid handsomely by Nokia and a few other major sponsors and that keeping the big guys happy was a priority over supporting a small games studio. The story even got some  coverage in Finland. “This is Finland,” he said. “It is almighty Nokia for some people here, still.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg will announce today that Cornell University has been selected to build a new tech campus on Roosevelt Island, the two organizations say. It’s not that surprising, considering how the negotiations had gone at the end of last week. Cornell’s top contender, Stanford University, dropped out on Friday — then Cornell followed up an hour later by announcing that it had already raised $350 million for the project. [Update: “The city is also still negotiating with NYU, Columbia and Carnegie Mellon, to help them realize their proposals in some way,” BetaBeat reports live from the press conference today.] The goal of the campus is to further develop New York City as a key destination for technical talent, in the hopes of building a university-oriented innovation ecosystem along the lines of what Stanford and Berkeley have in Silicon Valley, and what MIT has in Cambridge. Cornell, an Ivy League school located far out in Ithaca, New York (state), already has a large medical center near the island in Upper East Side of Manhattan. And the city is full of Cornell alumni who want to see their alma mater become a more vital part of the emerging local tech scene. Check out images of the new campus here. And really, looking back, you have to wonder how serious Stanford had been lately. The timing of the Stanford pull-out and the Cornell donation was a little too good. Based on a couple recent conversations with some well-connected Stanford alums, my understanding is that it had already become clear that Stanford and the city were not going to work things out, so the city had Stanford go ahead and say it was out as a more gracious alternative to simply losing the bid. Another wrinkle here is that Cornell is being named this quickly. City officials had previously said not to expect a decision until next month. Stanford had been frustrated by, among other issues, the back-and-forth negotiating that the city did once the university had submitted its bid in October, according to an earlier report by The New York Times. That sort of thing doesn’t happen so much in Palo Alto. Stanford had also not shown the same sort of financial or emotional support. I’ve also heard that some at Stanford preferred a serious campus investment to happen elsewhere, such as China (I’m seeing what else I can dig up about that). Pleased that Stanford withdrew from NYC.  Stanford students belong in Palo Alto. The new campus, a partnership with Israel’s Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, will cost more than $2 billion, and will be comprised of 2.1 million square feet dedicated to classrooms, labs, conference centers, housing and more for 2,000 graduate students. The university intends to build quickly, and start classes by next September. Be sure to check out our further coverage: Silicon Island: What Cornell’s New York City Tech Campus Will Look Like [Images] Interview: Cornell’s Dean Huttenlocher, On Expanding Into NYC And Building A Tech Ecosystem [Campus visualization via Cornell University.] Latest headlines delivered to you daily The first time I was chased around a room by a glowing, buzzing ball I was in college and I had just come home from a rave. The last time was when I opened the Sphero and set it loose on my rug. The Sphero is a ball with a brain. Designed by Orbotix, this 3-inch toy has an internal motor and a set of LEDs that can make it flash nearly any color of the rainbow. It’s run by iOS or Android apps that allow you to control the Sphero, play virtual golf, and draw images in light (albeit in a roundabout way). We live in interesting times when it comes to hardware. It’s easier than ever to create cool stuff, as evidenced by the rise of gadgets like the Fitbit and the Parrot AR.Drone. The Sphero is no exception. It’s one of the coolest hardware projects I’ve seen in a while and the ease-of-use and simplicity of the concept is impressive. Sphero is a toy and the kids in my house really enjoyed it… for a while. Sadly, I think Sphero will be relegated to the bottom of the toy box far too soon and the various apps that interact with it, while fun, aren’t all that compelling. After all, there are only so many ways you can sell “Make ball go forward. Now make ball turn green” before you get bored.  As a technological artifact, the ball is incredible. When’s the last time you’ve seen a small, self-propelled ball with built-in gyroscope, accelerometer, Bluetooth radio, and compass? You could put a little explosive in these and they could be a Bond villain. Is the Sphero fun? Sure, for about a day. It would make a great desk or office toy and should be fun for cats (it’s clearly fun for 3-year-olds). It think the ball will be really great once Orbitix releases their SDK, allowing users more control over these wee fellows. For example, I could definitely see some cool applications in experimental robotics. Could you imagine a flock of these things rolling down the street. As it stands right now the Sphero is cool – but maybe not cool enough. Give it a few months to see where the platform is headed and then maybe scoot over to the online store and get the ball rolling. The Sphero is shipping now for $129.  Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily TC50 DemoPit company from the long-ago times of 2009, AskYourTargetMarket, is now making its market research tool available for free. With the service’s most recent update, companies, startups and individuals will be allowed to send an unlimited number of surveys for free, when the recipient is a peer, client, or friend or follower on a social networking site. However, when a business needs AYTM’s international panel to answer questions, there will still be a charge. Unlike many other survey tools, AYTM is different because it allows you to specifically direct your questions to a target audience based on their psychographic and demographic characteristics. The international panel provided by the company recently added respondents in Canada, the U.K., Australia and India, in addition to the panelists already available in the U.S. The entire platform reach is now at 4.5 million respondents as of this fall. Survey respondents can answer questions online, or, as of this recent update, on mobile. Both iOS and Android smartphones and tablets are supported – all the respondent has to do is click a link and the survey opens in the mobile browser. The experience is optimized for mobile, even including features like drag-and-drop (for reorder and sliders type questions), which are typically found only on desktop surveys. The surveys have been improved, too, with added support for answer randomization and the ability to set the minimum and maximum number of checkboxes that can be selected for particular questions. The price per complete for AYTM’s panel usage starts at $0.95, but, as noted above, the service itself is now free to use for anyone just looking for an online surveying platform to use with their own list.  To date, the company has completed over 20.5 million surveys since its public launch just over 2 years ago. You can check out the new update to AskYourTargetMarket here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fledgling content farm Skyword has raised $6 million from broadcasting and publishing company Cox Media Group. Skyword markets a “digital content platform” that provides brands and media companies with a way to buy ‘search engine and social network friendly’ articles written by Skywriters™ (for real). The company claims it delivers original, high-quality content designed to reach vast audiences all across the Internet, evidently at an absurdly low cost.  Which is about as plausible as AOL claiming it’s successfully transforming into a cutting-edge online media company. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BrandMyMail is launching a new web-based platform for customizing your email messages using social media. The service is designed mainly for businesses, but can be used by anyone who wants to spice up their email with real-time content, including Twitter feeds, YouTube videos, Flickr photos, blog posts from WordPress and Tumblr, Quora posts, eBay listings and more. To use the service, you set up a customizable template to control what pieces of content appear in your email message. This content, which comes in the form of “plugins,” is added to templates via drag-and-drop from the BrandMyMail website. You can also customize the design and the layout of the message, too, using the provided templates. Currently, BrandMyMail supports Gmail users on the Firefox or Chrome browsers, plus iPad, iPhone and iPod Touch users. Support for Android and SMTP clients is in development as is support for other email providers, like Hotmail. For what it’s worth, Gmail itself provides a bit of added functionality to email messages itself, by extracting the photos and YouTube videos mentioned in the messages and placing them at the bottom of the message for easy access. But BrandMyMail wants to go further, allowing you to include dynamic content – like Twitter updates or Facebook messages – in addition to static media, like a hosted YouTube video. The idea of making email more interactive is something we’ve seen before, with the email startup PowerInbox, for example. That service works in a similar way to BrandMyMail, except that it’s focused on making incoming messages more interactive, not outgoing ones. It’s somewhat incredible how relatively unchanged email has been over the years, which has allowed for some interesting integrations from outside vendors, like PowerInbox, Rapportive, Xobni, and others. BrandMyMail was started by Shay Rojansky, Limor Schweitzer and Roberto Varela, and is based in Funchal, Portugal. It currently has €227,000+ (EUR) in angel funding.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Twistory, which lets people save their tweet backlog to their favorite calendaring application, has finally come through with full support for popular Web-based calendaring service Google Calendar. You can now subscribe to Twistory using your existing Twitter account and automatically view in Google Calendar when you’ve tweeted what. Up until now, compatibility with Google Calendar was a little flaky, but the team behind Twistory tells me it is now finally stable. Twistory is available for free, allowing you to visualize your last month worth of tweets in your calendaring application of choice.  There’s also a paid version, Twistory Pro ($1/month), which gives you access to your entire Twitter backlog (currently limited by Twitter to 3,200 tweets) and allows you to export your entire Twitter history as a CSV file. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BestVendor, which aims to create an online resource where business professionals can exchange recommendations for work-related software and services, has raised $3 million in Series A funding. The financing round was co-led by RRE Ventures and SoftBank Capital, with previous backer Lerer Ventures, Founder Collective’s David Frankel, David Tisch (who heads TechStars NYC), and Old Willow Partners participating. Founded in January 2011 and based out of New York City, BestVendor says it aims to be for recommendations and reviews of work apps what Amazon is for books and Yelp for restaurants. The site was launched – in beta, of course – last month and has already attracted more than 4,800 members, who’ve shared 13 work-related applications on average. In June 2011, BestVendor secured $600,000 in seed funding from SV Angel, Peter Thiel, Lerer Ventures, and SoftBank Capital.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile development platform company Appconomy has raised $10 million in Series A equity and debt funding to accelerate its operations in China. The round was led by Shanghai-based Qiming Ventures. Other investors include IT services provider Neusoft Corporation (which Appconomy had previously formed a strategic alliance with) and previous backers Western Technology Investment and True Ventures. Appconomy operates a cloud-based platform for mobile marketing and commerce that connects consumers and merchants through its AppWallet marketplace on smartphones, tablet computers, and feature phones. Basically, the platform and technology help mobile app developers integrate in-app commerce and community services for daily deals and coupons, loyalty and rewards programs, and social network & private group sharing. In partnership with Neusoft, Appconomy plans to leverage combined customers and partners in China and the United States, which happen to be the two largest markets for apps in the world. Qiming Ventures MD Gary Rieschel has joined Appconomy’s board of directors. Appconomy says it will continue to operate its U.S. headquarters, product and business development in Austin, Texas and run its Chinese operations from Shanghai. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This guest post was written by Christine Tsai is a Partner at 500 Startups, where she juggles investments, the 500 Mentor network, platform companies, and more. Prior to 500, she was at Google and YouTube for many years. Follow her on Twitter at @christine_tsai Parenthood is the closest thing I’ve found to entrepreneurship. Looks cool from the outside but can be really messy inside. Everyone has advice, you work like a dog, the highs are amazing and lows horrendous, and it is the best thing ever. A 500 Startups company founder emailed me this recently, and I found it to be the best analogy I’ve heard in a long time. Being a parent and being an entrepreneur are quite similar. Allow me to elaborate based on my experience as a mom so far and someone who works very closely with entrepreneurs. Looks cool from the outside but can be really messy inside. Jeff Lu of Daily Aisle said it best in a recent blog post he wrote about the hardships of doing a startup:  I find it entertaining observing other startup founders. We all ask each other how everything is going and we all answer “GREAT” and then like a PR firm, we spew the latest good news spin. I then go grab drinks with a few close founder friends and we order stiff drinks, stare off like zombies, and talk about all the things going wrong with our companies. From an outsider’s perspective, things could appear to be going very well. Yet people are blithely unaware of the fact that you’re still struggling to make money, you can’t figure out why your customers aren’t converting into paying customers, you get the sinking feeling you’re going to have to fire one of your employees, you and your co-founder aren’t seeing eye to eye. The only toilet in your office bathroom keeps clogging. Every night you go to bed (when you actually sleep in your bed) and have trouble falling asleep because you’re worrying about all these problems. Motherhood is also something where oftentimes you feel like you’re forced to plaster a smile on your face whenever someone asks you about how things are going. What you expose to the world is carefully curated – my son’s blog features photos and videos that make it seem like having a baby is fun and easy. The reality? You’re running on fumes with only a couple hours of sleep each night. You barely have enough time to eat a full meal. Every little thing freaks you out and sends you running to the pediatrician. The job literally is messy, too — poopy diapers, spit-up, streams of pee all over your clothes, projectile poops, drool. To be fair, it’s especially difficult when your child is an infant, and most parents will tell you that it keeps getting better and better. But with a new age comes a new set of challenges. So I don’t believe things ever get “easier.” Everyone has advice. Launch now. No, launch in 6 months. You should be selling to small businesses. No, you should be selling directly to consumers. Raise a small advisory round now. No, hold off and raise a huge seed round. Your company name is holding you back from getting more customers – change it.  It’s in your best interest to be talking to as many people as possible about your startup. However, this presents a challenge when you’re in coffee meeting after coffee meeting and everyone is doling out all sorts of advice. How do you know who to listen to? Your head spins after hearing all this advice. Moms get their fair share of conflicting advice, with a heaping of unsolicited advice. Parents debate the pros/cons of different types of disposable diapers, whether the supposed carcinogens in Johnson & Johnson baby products hurt their kids who used it, which method of sleep training to use. The fact that there is no right or wrong answer and the fact that you’re already on edge about every little decision and how it’ll potentially impact your child in the long run, makes parenthood all the more confusing. You work like a dog. Entrepreneurs don’t have a regular 9-5 work day. They don’t take vacations. They live and breathe their business 24/7 and wear many different hats. Polyvore co-founder Jess Lee notes in this Fast Company article how she wrote code, sold ads, did dishes, and went on food runs. A few of our founders shared their lesser known roles at their companies in this blog post. I can say without a doubt that being a mom is the ultimate test of my multi-tasking skills. I spend my day meeting startup after startup, helping our portfolio companies, bringing in speakers, and soon gearing up for Demo Day for our accelerator program. I am also my son’s diaper changer, food source, coach, laundry service, dish washer (or rather, bottle washer), and medical aide. I take phone calls with startups while also supervising my son as he plays on his activity mat and editing slides for an upcoming fund advisory meeting. Once he’s down for the night, I’m back on my laptop. Everyday is a marathon, where I’m left completely wiped out at the end. And then the sun rises and it starts all over again. The highs are amazing and lows horrendous. Very few people talk about the emotional roller coaster that comes with being a founder. Even with the most successful businesses, it’s rarely pretty behind the scenes. You make tough decisions, deal with rejection, lose money, lose customers, argue with your co-founders. Founders put everything on the line to start their companies, and it takes a toll on everyone around them. That said, when things are good, they can be good. You feel on top of the world when you land your first paying customer, close a round of funding, hit 500K users, hire awesome people. Moms know exactly how that feels. Some days I am SuperWoman. I can do anything and everything and feel that I truly do have it all — an awesome baby, awesome family, awesome job, awesome everything! I pat myself on the back for being able to get my son ready for the day, having a bunch of good meetings, and making it home on time while also keeping the house tidy and organized. Then there are days where I feel like I’m failing at home, failing at work, just failing all over the place. Basically, like I’ve hit rock bottom. It is the best thing ever. I’ve never met an entrepreneur who regretted taking that path, even if it cost them everything. I’ve never met a parent who regretted having children, no matter what sacrifices they made to raise them. Startuphood and parenthood are not for the faint of heart. But that’s what makes the journey so rewarding and such a thrill. You learn so much about yourself and surprise yourself with what you’re really made of when you’re pushed past your limits.  What I’ve found therapeutic is knowing that I’m not alone. Hearing other parents’ trials and tribulations makes me realize that, in fact, I’m not doing too shabby of a job and that it isn’t just me who finds this whole parenting thing difficult. In the same vein, entrepreneurs should never feel like they’re alone. I sincerely hope that every entrepreneur out there feels like they can be truly honest and transparent about their emotions and struggles — if not to a wide audience, then at least to a small circle of confidantes. It’s never good to keep all that bottled up inside of you. We’re allowed to be human.  As counter-intuitive as this may seem coming from someone who’s a VC – while running a company may seem like it’s all about the destination (or exit), it is the journey that ultimately has the most significance. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If there’s one thing the world needs it’s a service that lets you build a shirt using 3D rendering technology. Sure we could use cars that run on water and world peace, but let’s get the little things out of the way, right? Thankfully, there’s BleuFlamme, a website created by a gaggle of eight engineers who have dedicated their lives to the sale of custom shirts.  Building a shirt is fairly simple: you pick a style, a collar, some fabric, stick it all together, and they have it made in Hong Kong and shipped to you. They start at $99 each – a bit steep, but it sure beats a trip to Cameron Road. We’ve covered a number of these custom shirt sites, most recently J Hilburn and all of them seem to be improving upon the age old custom tailoring model. The question, then, is whether this model needs disruption? There are plenty of folks out there who want custom clothing. I’m no clothes-horse but a nice custom shirt looks good. $99 good? Hey, if you’ve got the IPO cash, why not flaunt it? BleuFlamme isn’t sitting still and will be improving their service over the next year. Quoth founder Jin Takahito: This coming Q1 we will release a rotatable 3D shirt model so you can preview your shirt design from all angles – implemented in pure HTML5 – something from a technical standpoint, is very hard to accomplish but in return provides better user experience from across any browsers any device. I will also introduce Community Gallery of shirt designs contributed by our users where you can get some initial inspirations when designing your own dream shirt. He also notes that “We are pushing human civilization forward as we speak,” which is a pretty noble goal, although a bit shortsighted. We’re going to need custom shirts when we leave to civilize species on other planets, Jin. Will you be there for us? This slideshow requires JavaScript.Product Page  This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInScott Harrison’s Global MissionScott Harrison is the founder of Charity: Water an organization he founded after waking up to the realization he was living a “dark, kind of decadent selfish existence” as a nightclub promoter whose life revolved around getting “people wasted for a living.” After drenching himself in the party planning business for 10-years, Harrison sought out opportunities with a bit more substance, but tells Founder Stories host Chris Dixon he was “turned down by every” humanitarian organization he applied to. Eventually he was accepted by Mercy Ships to volunteer in Africa – on the condition that he pay them $500 monthly, plus airfare. During his two year journey as a photojournalist with Mercy Ships, Harrison says he “learned that almost 80% of disease on the planet came from bad water.” The entire experience stirred something deep inside him and he tells Dixon at the age of 30 “I wanted to change the whole world and thought I could end the water crisis in my lifetime and I could also reinvent charity.” Upon launching Charity: Water, Harrison notes he “made the promise from day one to always use 100% of the public’s money to directly fund water projects and have a second bank account where I would kind of scrap to pay for our eventual staff, and our office and our operations.” He also made the promise to “never fund a water project unless we could be guaranteed to know that it existed.” Guidelines established, Harrison raised his first “$15,000” after throwing himself a birthday party that attracted 700 of his best friends who each paid a $20 cover. The funds went directly to Northern Uganda where he tells Dixon, “we built three wells in a refugee camp [and] we fixed three wells.” Those wells were just the beginning of what has since become more than 3,500 Charity: Water projects around the world. Harrison shares plenty more insights in this video. Make sure to watch the entire clip to hear them all, including his thoughts on building “an epic brand” and why he continued hitting the nightclubs at 4:00 am – long after leaving the party scene behind. Episode II of this interview is coming up – until then check out past episodes of Founder Stories featuring leaders of Turntable.fm, Bump, Dropbox and many other startups here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily While I find that I like my ferrite-based Kickstarter art projects to be a bit more automatic, the Ferrite Interactive Liquid Sculpture is still pretty cool. It’s a tube containing a Ferrofluid – a suspension of ferrite particles – that is shock-resistant enough to survive a few tumbles. You can use a magnet to create odd shapes, experience the magic fo magnetics, and you can put it on your desk and toy with it as you wait for 5 o’clock to roll around. $100 gets you a mini tube while $125 gets you the larger model. Both include powerful magnets for controlling your ferrite experience and all are made by one David Markus, an industrial design student from Georgia.  While the project isn’t very high tech, what it lacks in gizmos it makes up for in creativity. Besides, who, I ask you, who doesn’t like magnets? Who?  Project Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest contributor Amit Shafrir is president of Badoo, a social network for meeting new people based in London with 130 million users. Silicon Valley is famously, and rightly, proud of its place as the spiritual home for startups. And it has an inspiring and awesome track record that’s tough to beat. However, as the recent Le Web conference proved, European tech hubs like London, Berlin and more recently Paris, can now also lay claim to breeding world-class entrepreneurs. There’s a sense that Europe is finally getting its groove on when it comes to startup innovation, and that’s exciting to watch and be a part of. (When even Chanel designer Karl Lagerfeld is getting in on the action, you know that Digital/Tech is having a moment…) Loic Le Meur’s mission for Le Web—to bring the best of Silicon Valley to Europe—is a laudable one. As Loic says in this TCTV interview, European entrepreneurs are eager to learn from the best and the brightest in the US. And if you look at the headlines from this year’s Le Web, you’ll see the usual bold-faced American names, such as Google, LinkedIn, Foursquare, Twitter, Flipboard, and Instagram. But hang on a second. Shouldn’t it work the other way around too? Shouldn’t we in the States also look to the European startup renaissance for ideas and inspiration? After all, some of the most successful start-ups on stage at Le Web weren’t just the Valley wunderkinds, flown over to show the Euros how it’s done. They were the European companies that are innovating in the fields of commerce, lifestyle, and social networking. Not content with just providing local versions of Facebook or LinkedIn, they are creating new businesses for a sophisticated consumer audience. And proving they can be profitable. With Spotify as a notable exception, there wasn’t a ton of excitement or buzz about those European startups over here. And I have to question why that is. I welcome your thoughts in the comments. In the meantime, here is my own attempt to try and help redress that balance. Below is my own take on five of the European startups we should be paying closer attention to in 2012: Social gaming: Wooga: One of the hottest companies to emerge from the Berlin tech hub, Wooga is Europe’s largest social games developer and the third largest in the world. Wooga recently launched the mobile version of its game Diamond Dash, one of the top 10 social games on Facebook, and hopes to reinvent mobile game app distribution through smarter use of Facebook’s app notifications.  Online Music: Deezer: Spotify might be making all the headlines over here, and they certainly had a good showing at Le Web this year. But French mobile music-on-demand site Deezer seems intent on giving them a run for their money, announcing their expansion to 130 more countries at Le Web, taking the total to 200 around the world. Interestingly, this doesn’t include plans for the US. Deezer’s CEO, Axel Dauchez, is focused on smartphone users and doesn’t see enough growth happening in the States compared to other countries and territories. However, this decision might be better explained by its competitors’ well-documented struggles with US music labels. Soundcloud: Headquartered in Berlin, fast becoming a hub for the online music industry and with two Swedish founders, Soundcloud is one of the German capital’s most prominent start-ups. The company is growing at a rapid pace, with over 8 million people creating and sharing sounds across its platform. With its focus on the mobile platform and apps, Soundcloud looks set for an even bigger 2012. Personal Finance: Wonga: UK-based short-term online loans company Wonga (the name is a British slang term for cash) is on a tear and looks set to keep growing as the UK economy continues to falter and the need for such a service increases. Wonga closed a massive $117 million round back in February, for further expansion in the UK. Photo-Sharing: Eye-Em: Unlike the much-hyped Color, Berlin-based Eye-Em has seemingly found a way to make photo-sharing on your smartphone, well, a smart idea. It’s still early days, but the company is growing fast, and is another one to watch. This list doesn’t even scratch the surface. I could add other more established names, like Rovio, creator of the hugely successful Angry Birds gaming franchise, or private luxury deals site, Vente Privee. In short, Europe is no longer just imitating the Valley; it’s creating its own narrative for success. And as innovators and business creators in a global economy, the US entrepreneurial community should be sitting up and taking notice. Map image by blogdroed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last we covered Kicksend in November, the Y Combinator-incubated web file-sharing tool for the non-technical crowd, had just raised $1.8 million in funding from True Ventures, with participation from Digital Garage, SV Angel, Start Fund, and Milo Founder and CEO Jack Abraham. The team was heads-down fixing, tweaking, and developing some new features for their file-sharing service. But, today, the startup is going mobile with a new iPhone app to let users take all of their photos videos they have stored on their phone and instantly send them to any friend, list of colleagues, or email address, instantly — across platforms. For those unfamiliar with the service, Kicksend has launched web and desktop apps that connects users in realtime, enabling them to drag and drop big batches of files from their desktop and have them delivered instantly to their desktop and web apps. And now this functionality has arrived on mobile. Kicksend’s advantage over other file sharing media is that it has no size limits, is private, and works asynchronously — unlike IM. With Kicksend, there is no need for share folders and permissions, and now with its mobile app, the startup is live on all the major platforms.  Like its desktop and web apps, Kicksend allows users to send large batches of high-res photos and videos from their phones to any friend, instantly, regardless of whether or not they’ve downloaded the Kicksend app.  Basically, Kicksend has enabled simple file-sharing on the iPhone, so if users send documents from other apps, or, say, you’re using GoodReader and you view a PDF, users can choose “Open in Kicksend”, you can share that with any other user in realtime — something that will be awesome for all those holiday photos.  Thus, documents, photos, and videos will appear instantly on the recipient’s desktops and mobile devices in realtime, or, in turn, users can view, send, and comment privately on PDFs, documents, photos, videos and more. If recipients don’t have the Kicksend app, they can receive files via email with links to download within minutes. There are a ton of file-sharing services out there, but Kicksend has a great user interface, is extremely simple to use, and pretty much allows users to send any size file easily, instantly, to any device, across any platform, offering notifications and statistics to boot, so that users can see how many people in a group have downloaded the file. It’s a great tool. For more, check out the app here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As Dave Chase wrote earlier this year, the healthtech space is heating up, and a lot of serial entrepreneurs with consumer web experience are turning their focus to fixing some of the big problems inherent in the legacy health systems we have today in the U.S. and abroad. Yet, in spite of the $1 billion pool VCs have poured into startups last year, for example, healthtech startups, specifically, aren’t seeing a lot of that capital. There are a lot of challenges inherent to launching a healthtech startup that companies in the consumer web just don’t have to deal with, HIPAA-compliance, among others. While it’s difficult for all startups, establishing B2B relationships and intricate partnerships is no simple task. That’s where health-focused accelerators like Rock Health come into the picture. (And we need more.) Rock Health has a great list of mentors (more here), and list of financial and health-related partners is growing fast as well.  Today, the company is officially pulling back the curtain on their second batch of startups. There are 15 companies in this batch, which will begin the 5-month Rock Health program beginning in January 2012. (You can read more on the accelerator’s inaugural batch here.)  Without further ado, here they are:  Agile Diagnosis is creating a web and mobile platform that provides clinicians with evidence and expert-consensus based, best practices in the form of highly actionable clinical algorithms. The startup wants to make it easier and quicker for clinicians to give their patients the best possible care.  Avva is the first, online patient-focused breast cancer management tool that allows patients to comprehensively organize, manage, and communicate important information throughout the breast cancer experience. Cardiio empowers ordinary people with simple yet powerful tools to experiment, gain insight and take charge of their health and wellbeing.  Care at Hand is a mobile-based electronic health records and workflow automation software for home health care agencies. It also allows for new participation by family members via an online portal. With increased efficiency, agencies will be able to retain and attract new customers at a higher rate.  ChickRx is a healthy living community and marketplace for young women. Young women are preoccupied with health and wellness (diet, weight, birth control, STDs, mental health, skin, etc.), but existing health sites are clinical, target everyone or target moms.  Cognitive Health Innovations provides an online environment to help people address mental health issues and achieve personal growth goals using scientifically validated psychotherapeutic techniques and structured social interactions.  Docphin is the Bloomberg for Doctors. Docphin is a platform that personalizes medical news and research. In an environment that includes over a thousand medical journals with content that is increasingly complex and fragmented, physicians have grown tired of searching for relevant news. Docphin was created to address the “find” problem which has challenged physicians for decades. Docphin’s platform enables users to easily personalize the news and research that matters most to them and their patients.  Epi.MD is creating a dynamic, social population management tool that’s designed to help medical providers manage their patient population, disseminate information about new health care trends, and take immediate action to improve the health of their patients.  GetMyCare is a home health care marketplace that helps families find high quality caregivers at the lowest cost. Caregivers on our network range from non medical home care aides to physical therapist to licenced registered nurses.  HealthRally is a crowdfunding platform that lets friends and family motivate one another to achieve health goals with money and rewards. Think KickStarter for personal health motivation. (Read our coverage of HealthRally’s seed raise from Esther Dyson and more here.)  Helpful Systems is building an analytics system to predict and identify patients who are most at-risk for developing a hospital-acquired infection based on patient demographics and behavior patterns, hospital staff behavior patterns, and hospital logistics.  Nephosity shares medical images on the iPad. Doctors have access to a patient’s medical images anywhere, anytime, and can collaborate with their colleagues.  Sano Intelligence is developing a powerful mobile health monitoring product that will reveal new insights about stage zero care. The startup’s initial product will be the first mobile sensor system to provide continuous metabolic panel data wirelessly to patients, providers, and the chronically ill. Senstore is a spin-out from Singularity University’s Graduate Studies Program 2011. We are developing open innovation tools and a community of developers and entrepreneurs to catalyze innovation around sensor devices and applications.  Our long term vision is to crowdsource the development of a medical tricorder which will enable low cost medical diagnosis to be performed by anyone, from anywhere.  Sessions aims to unlock social exercise by allowing people to share and discover exercise sessions around them. Think Meetup meets Foursquare for exercise. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s hard being a social network not called Facebook, but myYearbook isn’t one of those erstwhile rivals being sold off for assets. Instead, it’s been seeing strong mobile growth and revenue growth over the last year, building on its $100 million merger with QuePasa in July. Expect both to accelerate with the launch of its new iPad app today (available here). The company is now reaching half a million mobile users daily across major operating systems, chief operating officer and cofounder Geoff Cook tells me, with 200 million (unduplicated) monthly sessions in total. Android has grown to be the largest, beating iPhone usage by two to one. The set of mobile app developer acquisitions that the company did earlier this year seems to be paying off.  Revenue is also up. After posting revenues of $23.7 million last year, it’s grown to $36.3 million in the 12-month span through September. The new iPad app, which you can download here, improves on the existing mobile interfaces by adding a multi-pane interface for doing things like flipping through profiles while using specific features like apps. Look for it to get more of the main myYearbook.com site features early next year, Cook says. MyYearbook has transitioned from its roots as a high school social network to, in its words, the place to “meet new people near you.” That obviously translates to lots of dating-oriented features. It’s been launching games and other apps in-house, powered by its own virtual currency, that are designed to bring strangers together.  The iPad app already has some of those features in place, but so far it’s been monetizing through ads. The virtual currency is coming to mobile next quarter, Cook says, along with the games, which should help mobile monetization increase considerably. Dating apps, including mobile ones, have been quiet but substantial businesses. Cook also says that the iPad launch should be a hit with its users, a company survey recently showed that a large percentage of them are expecting iPads from Christmas. He’s aiming for a repeat of last year, when the sales of iPod Touches helped fuel the year’s growth.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, another TechStars Network accelerator comes online. Greenville, South Carolina’s “The Next Big Thing,” as it’s called, has been running in stealth mode since its founding in February 2011. But now, the incubator is ready for submissions. Companies can apply for the program starting today up until the window’s closing on April 20th. The Next Big Thing’s initial program will begin in summer 2012, culminating in a Demo Day in September. Like all TechStars Network affiliates, The Next Big Thing will provide those granted admission with support and capital to help get their startups off the ground. In this case, companies receive office space, mentorship, free legal and accounting work and $18,000 per team in seed funding. They will also receive around $75,000 in freebies and discounts from partners. In exchange, The Next Big Thing takes the typical 6% stake in each startup it invests in. The accelerator has lined up some significant mentors to kick off its launch, including Brad Feld, Bo Fishback, Ryan Carson, Hiten Shah, Eric Marcoullier, Lloyd Taylor and many others. In addition to its own startups, the accelerator also invests in other startups, usually graduates of similar accelerator program. Currently, it has invested in FullContact (TechStars Boulder 2011) and is closing on two investments from TechStars NY. The unique thing about this incubator is that it’s also hiring five designers skilled in one or more of the following: IA/UX, identity design, illustration, graphic/print design, HTML, CSS, Javascript/JQuery, video production and animation. The designers will be employed by the The Next Big Thing but will work with the teams individually. They will also be encouraged to join the program’s startups or launch their own, says TNBT Managing Director Peter Barth. Barth, an alumnus of Vanderbilt University, where he studied computer engineering, spent a couple of years on Wall St. as a registered options principal and general securities principal at Duke & Company and Morgan Stanley. But he soon realized that he really was a hacker at heart and he moved away to Indianapolis, taking a development position with SinglePoint. He worked his way up to CTO then purchased a stake in the business. In 2006, he relocated to Greenville and has been involved with the development of NEXT, the NEXT Innovation Center, InternGreenville, and now, The Next Big Thing. Other members of TNBT’s advisory board are detailed here. Interested startups can now apply for The Next Big Thing here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Doing some online shopping but don’t want the package shipped to your house? Maybe you won’t be home, or worry about packages left on your doorstep. Or maybe the package is a gift for someone in your household? Here’s a cool idea: pick up your online orders at a local store instead. That’s the premise of the young startup called Kinek, which has partnered with a number of brick-and-mortar stores across the U.S. and Canada to serve as “KinekPoints” – secure locations where you can pick up your deliveries. Now, the company is releasing its first iPhone application, allowing you to find nearby KinekPoints, check their hours, get directions, track packages and receive push notifications when the package has arrived. For consumers, there’s no monthly or sign-up fee to use Kinek, but there’s sometimes a small per-package fee applied by the individual KinekPoint location. The high range for the fee isn’t too bad – usually around $5 for a regular-sized package. Some retailers don’t charge a fee at all, though, because they benefit from the foot traffic that comes from being a KinekPoint. However, all retailers have to pay to be a KinekPoint partner on a per-parcel basis. Currently, Kinek has partnered with brick-and-mortar retailers including Medfast, Storage-mart, Pharmasave, and DoItBest (the latter two in select locations only, not the entire chain). It has also partnered with online retailers Sierra Trading Post and Monoprice to provide online shoppers with an alternative shipping address when the company doesn’t ship to their home. The company now has over a thousand locations across 42 U.S. states and nearly all Canadian provinces. KinekPoints are most popular in major metro areas like San Francisco (73), Los Angeles (59), Chicago (32), San Diego (30), Kansas City (28), Atlanta (27), Miami (27), Toronto (24), Dallas (23), Washington D.C. (23), New York (22), Philadelphia (14),  Seattle (13), Orlando (12) and Montreal (10). But it has really taken off in rural areas along the U.S./Canadian border, as it offers Canadians a way to avoid international shipping and handling fees. They just have the package sent to their favorite KinekPoint address, then drive across the border to pick it up. The iPhone app serves as a great complement to this handy service, especially because it provides mobile access to package tracking and push notifications. You can choose to have messages sent to you via SMS and email, too, if you prefer. Kinek launched in December 2009, and was started by CEO Dr. Kerry McLellan, Ph.D., who is also CEO of Applepeak Inc. and owner of Clean Earth Ltd. He previously was COO of 724 solutions from 1998-2000. Kinek is personally funded by McLellan, but is in talks with investors at this time. The idea for the startup clearly has merit – after all, Amazon is doing the same thing. The Internet retailer has been testing a “delivery locker” system at select 7-Eleven stores in the U.S. in recent months where the convenience store serves as sort of a 24/7 post office for Amazon order pick-ups. You can grab the new Kinek for iPhone here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily News curation startup Scoop.it has arrived on the iPhone today, allowing you to create your own digital magazine while on the go. The app, which works alongside the Scoop.it web service, essentially lets anyone be a publisher for any topic. Or perhaps, the more correct word is not “publisher,” it’s “aggregator.” Scoop.it “publishers” aren’t always writing and producing their own content, although that is an option. But Scoop.it’s main focus is on its content aggregation tools. Publishers select the best content from around the web and then publish it in a magazine-like format that looks similar to something created by Pressly or OnSwipe. Previously, this curation process was done either through a browser bookmarklet, by accepting content submission from others, or by accepting a post suggested by Scoop.it’s own recommendation engine. Now, with the new iPhone app, curation can be done from your mobile, too. Using the app, Scoop.it users can select, edit and publish posts, review suggestions and share to their connected Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr accounts. The app is a handy companion for Scoop.it itself, but only for those who already have their magazine up-and-running. You have to first set up your magazine’s topics via the web – you can’t begin the process using the app. That’s a shame since, for many people, the first time they’ll ever encounter Scoop.it is via the App Store. News aggregation can be a touchy topic – is it right to re-publish others’ work and brand it as your own, even if you’re sending the sites traffic? Some would say no. But aggregation has proved a successful business model in many cases, and the human-assisted curation that accompanies it, such as what’s provided by Techmeme for example, makes curation a form of content creation itself. Who’s to say that Scoop.it couldn’t form the basis of a thousand tiny, niche Techmeme’s in the future? Scoop.it is currently a freemium service. Individuals can publish up to 5 topics per account, but have to use Scoop.it’s own branding. Business accounts offer more topics and features, including domain hosting and analytics for $79/month. The Scoop.it iPhone app is here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For a long time now, Spotify has had its own Radio experience, but, to be honest, it hasn’t been very good. Then, last week, the Swedish-turned-America music service announced that it was redesigning its radio experience from the ground up, offering unlimited stations and unlimited “skips”. And it’s no mistake that, during his presentation of the new Spotify Radio, CEO Daniel Ek happened to compare his app to Pandora. Since its IPO, Pandora has been on a kick, but Spotify is doing everything it can to continue nipping at its heels and has added 7 million new users since integrating with Facebook at f8.  At the end of November, Spotify hosted its first big American event, announcing a “new direction” for the service. A big part of this is Spotify’s new platform for third party developers, who are now able to integrate Spotify’s massive collection of music into their own apps. And today, Spotify will begin officially rolling out “Radio” to its users on top of its new app platform. But, what Spotify hasn’t been talking about until today is what kind of technology is powering its awesome redesigned Radio functionality. Enter: The Echo Nest, a music intelligence startup whose technology powers many music apps from media companies and independent developers. The Echo Nest is now providing its music intelligence technology to power intelligent radio and radio playlisting within the new Spotify Radio app as it rolls out today across the country. Given The Echo Nest’s relationship with app developers and record labels (it recently partnered with EMI to open its catalog to app developers), this relationship makes a lot of sense. The Echo Nest will now essentially be powering Spotify Radio, allowing users to create personalized radio stations based around songs or artists in Spotify’s roster of over 15 million tracks.  Partnering with The Echo Nest allows Spotify to enable users to build playlists dynamically around any song or artist for a far deeper radio experience than Spotify has offered previously. As The Echo Nest has one of the more sophisticated playlist engines out there, combining this playlist intelligence with Spotify’s huge catalog and deep social integration should definitely give Pandora pause.  Users will be able to find Spotify Radio located within Spotify Apps, which will now be available to users of its free service as well as Unlimited and Premium Subscription users.  For more, check out Spotify at home here or The Echo Nest at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Fab.com, the ridiculously fast growing e-commerce startup, is launching a new social shopping feature today that lets members view and interact with any activity on the design flash sales site in real-time. Dubbed the ‘live feed’ and reminiscent of Facebook’s early iterations of what is now the News Feed, it captures what users are purchasing, sharing, commenting on etc. The live feed adds a powerful social component to the e-commerce activity happening on Fab.com. Importantly, while all activity on the site is shared with anyone visiting the live feed, users have the possibility to conceal their usernames when they buy or favorite something on the site. All people need to do to appear anonymously as “a Fab user” is flick a virtual switch on the top right. Fab.com founder and CEO Jason Goldberg tells me social activity is mighty important to the company; more than 50 percent of its now 1.4 million strong registered user base were introduced to the site by people sharing items for sale at Fab on social networks. You’ll notice that the feed refreshes constantly. No wonder, if you consider that Fab.com has attracted close to 1.5 million members and sold over 600,000 items in just six months. Goldberg tells me that the partners of Andreessen Horowitz, the VC firm that recently led a $40 million funding round for the company, have never seen an e-commerce site grow this fast. At present, Fab’s annual revenue run rate is roughly $70 million. Again, in just six months. The company employed 3 people in New York City back in February 2011, and now 90 (and 130 in total worldwide). The company just nabbed a former Etsy VP as COO, too. Finally, make sure you DO NOT MISS Goldberg’s blog post about the recent fundraising bonanza.Latest headlines delivered to you daily Digital media is just more compelling when it is updated on a regular basis. That is what keeps people coming back. It’s as true for blogs as it is for apps.  Fotopedia has built a nice little franchise putting out digital photo books re-imagined for the iPad. After 9 apps and 6.2 million downloads, with 1.4 million active users and 100 million pageviews a month, it is taking a more magazine-liek apporach with its latest iPad app, “Wild Friends.”.  Instead of a relatively static set of highly-curated pictures around a single topic, you get a highly-curated set of pictures that changes every day.  And each photo now has a narrative caption written by the photographer. Fotopedia started experimenting with this more magazine-like approach in September with its HTML5 website and integration into Flipboard. You can see what the “Wild Friends” magazine looks like on the web also. By focusing on one topic area per photozine (animals, Japan, national parks), Fotopedia hopes to attract advertisers with rich magazine-like ads.  Delivering fresh content every day should give users a reason to visit more than 2.4 times per month (wich is the average). Fotopedia will eventually convert all of its existing apps into the magazine format as well, and soon will add Facebook Graph integration, which will allow readers who opt in to show every page they are browsing in their Facebook Tickers.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily I don’t know about you, but when I hear about another photo sharing app or website, my eyes roll back into my head, and I reflexively go into “screen saver mode”. There are just way too many options. How about Shutterfly, Kodak, Flickr, Instagram, Path, Twitter (TwitPic, Yfrog), Facebook, Google+, App Trover, GLMPS, Tracks, LiveShare, OpenPhoto — just to name a few. I don’t even like photos that much. So, when I heard about ZangZing, especially considering its name, I had the same reaction. However, back in April, Mike gave the pre-launch startup a ringing endorsement (granted, that was in comparison to Color), and Alexia backed up its private beta launch a few weeks later. So I pressed on. It also helps that ZangZing Co-founder and CEO Joseph Ansanelli has some serious startup cred under his belt, having founded and been CEO of four startups, one of which was acquired by Apple, another merged with Kana and went public, and then Vontu, which was acquired by Symantec for $350 million in 2007. “The world doesn’t need another Instagram-like photo streaming app and we are not that”, Ansanelli assures me. After all, photos are a huge category — Facebook sees over 250 million photos uploaded per day, and the CEO thinks there’s room for new services that redesign photo-sharing for a more traditional kind of user. And that’s ZangZing’s focus: The average photo user, not the uber adopter, people who care about ease of uploading, aggregating all their photos in one place, and privacy. Have a ton of photos on the soon-to-be-discontinued MobileMe? Ansanelli wants you to bring them to ZangZing all at once. And this last bit is what seems most interesting to me, not so much that ZangZing is now apparently importing one photo per second (after turning on one-click import), or that 70 photos is the average album size, it’s that 50 percent of the startup’s albums are currently private. Google+ launched to give users social circles within social circles, a “refined” mechanism for sharing content among specific groups of people.  In fact, Google acquired Katango to help them with that very problem. It’s a big, challenging goal that may never be solved completely — but ZangZing is yet another example that consumers want to share photos, just not with everyone, and founders want to try to bring them that experience. So, today, about eight months since the startup went into private beta, ZangZing is launching version 2.0 of its platform with some cool new features: Namely, one-click import from the majority of photo sites and social networks, including Facebook, Flickr, MobileMe, Instagram, Dropbox, Kodak Gallery, Shutterfly, etc. Just click “link”, and your photos arrive.  In this sense, ZangZing is really making a play at making it simple for users to add photos from anywhere, from a PC or Mac, Picasa Desktop, or iPhoto — giving users who feel their photos are “being held hostage” a chance to work within a more compatible platform. What’s more, you can email photos directly into a ZangZing album from any smartphone or any computer, or view photos in full-screen slideshows. And they won’t make you pay if you want to get your photos back. And, while Flickr has a bit of group sharing, it doesn’t work so well with one-time events, as Mike pointed out. With ZangZing, if you want to create a group album from an event, you simply upload a picture of the event through email invite your friends, and presto. On top of this, like many file-sharing sites, ZangZing wants to add soem granularity to its privacy controls by allowing users to decide who can add, view, and download full-resolution photos. Like any good social photo repository, it allows commenting to enable chat and social interaction around particular photos, and offers both people and activity views to surface albums based on who created them or when they were created, respectively — great for photo discovery. Furthermore, every ZangZing photo album has its own privacy setting, so that public photos are available to everyone, hidden albums let only those who know the web address view the albums, as well as invite-only albums that require sign-in. There are also a number of email settings to allow or disallow invitations, social following, confirmations, ZangZing news, etc. And, best of all? There’s no advertising. Another important piece of the puzzle if ZangZing is to convince users already inundated with photo-sharing websites that its model has a long-term value proposition. Because it won’t be offering advertising, ZangZing offers a bit of eCommerce, as it contains a number of product options, like prints (and mounted prints), photo panels, framed photos, etc., with which users can select images from favorite albums, customize dimensions, and check out directly. If someone buys your image, you get paid. It will be interesting to see if ZangZing goes to a freemium model to support its revenue model, but one thing’s for sure, the site is easy to navigate, is designed well, and I think it offers enough differentiation that it can become a valuable alternative to some of the legacy photo sharing options. Plus, an API is on its way. But I’m just one man, check it out and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Postmates is sort of like a modern version of the taxi dispatching software that Twitter creator Jack Dorsey had worked on as a kid. Except it’s available for businesses and consumers today in San Francisco, if you download its iPhone app (here). It lets you place an order for a delivery, notifies nearby couriers and bike messengers, then one of them accepts and picks up the package and brings it to you. Then you’ll get an email with a link that lets you track the delivery as it makes its way to you. Pricing is based on the item being delivered, distance, and other factors. It’s obviously also a lot like Uber. The service has been in closed beta with 50 or so businesses in the past months, with 1000 deliveries so far (check out this section of its site for more details on that). The first 100 readers here can get a $20 discount by using the following discount code: TECHCRUNCH. It was also a TechCrunch Disrupt finalist. The company, which was just founded in May, is also announcing a new round of $800,000 in funding from investors including Crosslink Capital, which follows a previous round of $750,000. Cofounder Bastian Lehmann tells me that the focus so far is local businesses, any company that wants to access its API, and consumers. While it’s looking at expanding to other cities in the next year, likely including New York and Los Angeles, it’s also looking at more sparsely populated areas, like suburbs. So far it’s been recruiting experienced couriers, but in those areas it could bring in less experienced people, he says. Here’s a visualization of the deliveries so far, with red being the heaviest usage. Looks like there are a lot of exports to the other parts of the Bay.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBilly Chasen on Startup StrategyHaving launched two companies that have gone in dramatically different directions; one’s secured $7-million in funding (Turntable.fm) and another ceases to exist (Stickybits), Turntable.fm’s Billy Chasen wraps his Founder Stories conversation by lending advice to other founders and discusses the biggest challenge he’s currently facing. Chasen tells host Chris Dixon that finding and hiring those “A+ rockstars” is his toughest task. He says on the surface it seems simple, but “it is actually incredibly difficult and it takes a lot of time and it takes a lot of energy and you don’t want to make a mistake.” He compares the hiring process to dating, “you can’t be too forward, the other person if they are too forward it kind of scares you away, there is like this whole just kind of dance.” Switching topics, Chasen says it’s key for founders to receive early feedback from consumers. His recommendation? “Try and get things out as early as possible. Figure out what your minimum viable product is and just get it out the door.” Hammering the point home he says, “whatever it takes, get that product out there.” Make sure to watch the entire episode to hear additional insights, including traits Chasen says startups and employees share – and what founders should avoid when dealing with both. Episode I of this interview is here and episode II is here. Past Founder Stories episodes featuring Mayor Bloomberg, Fred Wilson, David Karp and many other leaders are here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile games network PapayaMobile is launching a new accelerator for mobile, social game developers called “The Games Academy,” which will kick off in Q1 2012. Like most accelerators, Papaya will be providing developers with office space, support from a team of industry veterans, legal advice and an opportunity to pitch VC’s. However, there won’t be any seed capital provided, nor is the company taking an equity stake in the startups who join. Instead, Papaya only requires the teams use its Social Game Engine in their game’s development. Then at the end of the program, a “winning” team will be awarded with a grand prize of 100,000 guaranteed downloads. That’s right – this isn’t your typical accelerator, The Games Academy is also a competition. While everyone benefits from the mentorship, training, the Academy’s QA lab, office space (in the Parisoma Innovations Loft located in SOMA), as well as access to legal and VC’s, only one company gets the big, big boost: 100,000 downloads. PapayaMobile’s Justin Mauldin says that the company feels comfortable that it can push that much traffic to the winning app with its promotions, but if need be, it can buy incentivized installs from someone like TapJoy to fulfill the promise. As for the instructors, PapayaMobile has lined up some notable experts to start: David “dc” Collier, President of Tokyo-based Pikkle and formerly the Business Creator for Namco Web&Mobile in Tokyo; Joel Breton; producer of Bomberman Live, Unreal, Duke Nukem, and Pirates of the Caribbean; John Szeder, VP of Engineering at hi5, previously from Digital Chocolate; Mark Wallace, lecturer in the Games Dept. at the Academy of Art University and formerly Conversation Manager for Second Life; and Charlie Huenergardt, also from the Academy of Art Univ., a 15-year veteran who has worked at Sega, Sony, 3DO, EA, Pirate Games, Crystal Dynamics, Shaba Games, and Page 44. The program will run for four months and will include both classroom-style training and individual attention. Says PapayaMobile CEO Si Shen, The Games Academy is a move made in direct response to a market that has been over-saturated by game investment funds. “At the end of the day, money is only half of the equation,” she says. “Creating, marketing, and distributing successful social games that monetize well on mobile involves many different approaches. We intend to share our knowledge and bring about a shift in the industry.” Partnering in the launch is Patrick Chung, Managing Director at SK Telecom Ventures, who will be advising teams on funding and how to launch their games in various markets. Game development community Design3 will offer The Games Academy’s syllabus and materials online for teams who wish to participate virtually.  And non-profit Applications for Good will be seeding one of the development teams to create apps that serve a public purpose. Applications are open now for interested developers and will be up year-round. Going forward, The Games Academy expects to host three cycles per year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been a pretty good ride so far for digital couponing startup SavingStar. The company launched its beta last August behind $2.3 million in financing from Flybridge Capital Partners, First Round Capital, and Founder Collective, with participation from angel investors like Ron Conway.  The investment saw the digital coupon startup change its name from SaveWave to SavingStar, which it followed up with its official launch in April of this year, backed again by an impressive round, this time $7 million in series B financing from its existing investors, before adding Buddy Media Founder and CEO Michael Lazerow to its Board of Directors in June. With nearly $10 million in funding and a strong leadership team in tow, SavingStar today added another milestone, announcing that it has surpassed 1 million active users in exactly 230 days, an achievement which its founders are quick to note it made faster than bigs like Groupon, Twitter (over 2 years), or Foursquare (just over a year). What’s more, since launching, over 100 brands, like Tropicana, Huggies, Cambell’s etc. have offered deals on SavingStar, with savings up to 50 percent off. But, cheerleading aside, what is it about this company that attracted this sizable early investment and led to this strong growth? SavingStar fancies itself — in the style of the times — as the “Groupon for groceries”, or, simply put, a mainstream service that targets the world’s every day digital coupon clippers in an effort to make it easy for them to save money at local grocery stores.  Picking up where many have said that Groupon leaves off, the startup recently launched a loyalty offer that allows users who buy a certain item multiple times at different locations to receive additional cashback on their purchases. This is on top of the fact that SavingStar provides exclusive deals on name brand grocery products, which are linked to shoppers’ loyalty cards at more than 100 grocery and drug store chains, which enable users to save without having to clip or print paper coupons.  Considering consumers spend over $550 billion annually on groceries, thousands of consumer packaged goods vie for customer attention, and newspaper coupon distribution on the decline, SavingStar thinks that its poised to take advantage of customer attention turning to web and mobile-based services not only for deals, but for digital coupons.  The benefit of its model for brands is that brands can promote their products to SavingStar’s audience for free, and the company only charges when a product is actually purchased. It also receives universal product code data from retailers in its network, which then enables it to match offers activated by consumers with in-store purchases linked to shoppers’ loyalty cards — in an effort to help brands close the so-called “redemption loop”.  On the flip side, for consumers, SavingStar is free to use; all shoppers need to do is register their grocery and drug loyalty cards on SavingStar.com or on the company’s iPhone or Android apps. The service then links the offers to their registered cards so that when they purchase items and use their cards, the value of each is deposited as savings into their SavingStar account, rather than at checkout. Once they accumulate more than $5 in savings, users can cash out with a direct deposit into their PayPal or bank accounts, receive an Amazon gift card, or make a donation to charity.  This is where SavingStar believes it can differentiate its service from other eCoupon networks, in that it links offers users select to all of their registered loyalty cards at the same time, as well as enabling users to take advantage of mobile offers. According to SavingStar Head of Marketing Josh Grossman, no other grocery-focused digital coupon companies can make the same claim on a national basis. (SavingStar works with 100+ retail chains nationally, and is the only service that works with loyalty cards from drugstores like CVS and Rite Aid.) With so much activity in the daily deal and group buying space, it’s great to see a young startup actually approaching digital coupons, a relatively old business in comparison, with a simple yet innovative approach — one that appeals to everyday shoppers. SavingStar is a startup to keep your eye on, as it will be interesting to see if it can capitalize on strong early growth. For more on the company, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, it looks like hardcore gamers would like to have a word with you, social and casual gamers. Yes, the stories in the media of late have been all about Rovio’s Angry Birds skyrocketing past half a billion downloads, or Zynga and its ilk overtaking social games. Both casual and social games have been growing like gangbusters, but the latest data from Pando Networks reveals some fairly serious growth in the free-to-play gaming industry across the globe. Free-to-play games, just another way of saying “freemium games” are, to clear up any confusion, any game that is free to download and monetized by in-game purchases. Today, in mobile and web apps (and really the consumer web), we are seeing the coming of age of the freemium model and, as a result, advertisers and developers are being forced to find new ways to create revenue and monetize their games, whether that be by way of mobile advertising, virtual goods, avatars, in-game rewards, or incentivized installs. Today’s data from Pando Networks, a game delivery network for free-to play massively-multiplayer-online (MMO) games, is showing that free-to-play games are growing exponentially, right alongside their casual and social game bretheren. For example, the company’s data shows that the number of gamers downloading free games has grown 450 percent from 2009 to 2011, as more than 38 million people will download an online game using Pando in 2011 — and over 70 million people have downloaded free games since 2009. (And that’s not including the 11+ million playing Blizzard’s World of Warcraft.) Again, this hockey-stick growth has resulted from an industry-wide transition from a paid to freemium model, as can be seen in online gaming by the likes of both Turbine’s Lord of the Rings Online and WoW, which have both taken to the land of the free — along with newer, popular games like League of Legends (by Riot). And, in case it still needs hammering home, the explosive growth in free-to-play games is far from an American-only phenomenon. According to Pando, from October 2009 to October 2011, downloads in the U.S. have grown from 4.8 million to 12.6 million (an increase of 162 percent), while Latin America has seen downloads increase by 595 percent, compared to the U.K., where growth has shot up by a whopping 1025 percent.  Furthermore, developing nations like Turkey are gobbling up an increasingly significant share of downloads, considering over the last year, the number of gamers in Turkey downloading free-to-play games today sits over 5 million — an increase of 534 percent since 2010 (and more than 14 percent of the country’s total population).  As Turkey’s infrastructure and connectivity continues to expand, the country’s freemium gaming market has exploded right in tandem, and currently shows no sign of slowing down. Surely, this is a great sign for freemium games and the international gaming market, but it does make on worry about Turkey’s overall productivity. Here’s to hoping GDP doesn’t slip at the hands of widespread MMO gaming adoption. Compared to the size of population, Turkey certainly has one of the fastest growing freemium gaming markets, compared to, say, France, which has seen its freemium gamers grow from 139K in 2009 to 2.6 million in 2011, and Poland, which grew from 145L to 1.5 million over the same period. While it’s been clear for some time now the extent to which mobile and online platforms are being used by the ever-increasing gaming population in Asia, there hasn’t yet been such a clear picture of the extent to which the freemium model is being adopted in other global regions. And, again, turning to other sources, Pando’s data also seems to be clearly in support of PopCap’s November study (via Informations Solutions Group) of the growing social gaming market in the U.S. and the U.K., which found that more than 118 million people now play social games once per week, and 81 million people play at least once a day (which is 68 percent of all social gamers). Of course, that’s nice, but what’s really important is that today 31 million players have purchase in-game currency, up 86 percent from the previous year. Not only that, but Flurry blogged back in September that freemium games are leading all of the app revenue models in the iOS and Android app economies, as they now account for more than 65 percent of app revenue. So, to sum up, in the event that you’ve missed out on the last two years of gaming trends, it seems that freemium has not only fully arrived, but it’s here to stay, it’s taken over your home, and it’s raising your kids. For more, check out Pando’s data dump here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, online and mobile payments platform Dwolla is launching what may be one of its biggest features yet: instant access to cash. Via the new opt-in setting called “Dwolla Instant,” users will be able to immediately deposit and send cash without the usual wait times associated with the mobile payment platform – typically a few days. To use Dwolla Instant, users must first enroll in the service, which requires a monthly $3 participation fee. This fee will begin from the day you switch on Dwolla Instant, but can be turned off  and on at will, without penalty. Once enabled, you can then send  money to a friend, pay a merchant, or deposit funds instantly. You’ll tell Dwolla what the funding source is for that initial transaction, and that will then be tied to your “Instant Balance.” Immediately afterwards, Dwolla will allow you to make the payment via your linked bank account (Dwolla’s preferred funding source). Alternately, you can choose to “pay Dwolla back later,” if need be. That’s similar to how a credit card would work, but it’s a heck of a lot cheaper. The late fee for  the “pay Dwolla back” option is only $5.00. And Dwolla works hard to make sure you don’t forget, with notifications and reminders, unlike credit card companies who thrive off late payments. The reason why the fee is so low is because Dwolla makes its money elsewhere. It charges $0.25 per transaction, except for transactions under $10, which recently became free.  According to Dwolla CEO, Ben Milne, the reason why high fees exist in credit card networks has to do with legacy issues – the hardware, the infrastructure, and the resources needed to fight the rampant fraud associated with having your 16-digit card number just out there in the world, everywhere. “Creating a new network is the only way to keep the fees out,” he explains. “And Dwolla is the first payment network built in 30-odd years.” For those who have a hard time understanding exactly where Dwolla fits in the crowded mobile payments market where services like Square, Venmo, Google Wallet and PayPal get all the press, the difference is this: Dwolla is primarily a payments network, not a tool for enabling payments through the existing credit card network. In other words, it’s not like a Square or Google Wallet, for example, which allow you to link a credit card to your account. It is the card. Except there’s no card. In fact, if Square wanted to, it could integrate Dwolla as just another payment option into its own solution, if it wanted to. Google could as well. Or anyone. As to whether Dwolla’s ready for that, Mine says not now. “It’s too early,” he says. “We can provide more value in terms of partnerships. And everybody is on board for building a long-term play.” (Which, you know, is the best thing to say if you secretly want to be acquired, right?) We should point out that Dwolla isn’t just some outsider startup (it’s in Iowa!) going it alone. The company is backed by The Members Group, a financial services organization providing credit card processing, payment solutions, prepaid cards, consulting and more. So they sort of know what they’re doing over there. And weren’t you kind of getting sick of PayPal anyway? As for Dwolla Instant, it goes live today on the Dwolla website and will roll out to Dwolla’s mobile apps on iPhone and Android shortly thereafter. Latest headlines delivered to you daily My girlfriend: We’re late. We need to get a cab to the [Thanksgiving] dinner. Me: I just talked to the cab company and they’re going to take forever. I’m trying Uber. Her: There’s no Uber in DC. Me [checks app]: Oh, look, there is! The car will be here in 10 minutes.  And that’s how I discovered that Uber is launching in Washington, DC. Today, it’s announcing to the capital that it’s ready for business, having spent the last month recruiting drivers, testing routes and everything else that goes into opening up in a new area. I recently talked to Rachel Holt, who’s leading Uber DC, to get some more details about how the company has worked out this expansion. The first step is to figure out what the local market is looking for. DC is looking like a good target. Yes, politicians have their own taxpayer-supported livery services, but DC also has the highest concentration of people with secondary degrees. Between the better-paid government employees, contractors, law offices, lobbyists, universities, and the emerging tech scene, “there are a lot of people who want a better experience,” Holt explains. But unlike most cities (such as San Francisco), DC doesn’t artificially restrict the number of cabs, so getting them isn’t as big of a problem. However, the cars also tend to be run down, and service isn’t always great. And the thing about DC is that it’s a city of people who wear suits (also unlike SF). Uber’s black sedan-limos are providing cars to match.  DC also has some local issues that Uber can take advantage of. Cabs charge you extra for each additional stop, for example. The district is also stuck between two states and numerous counties, and many cab companies only serve some of them. If you’re downtown in the afternoon, you might have trouble getting a cab out to your home in the suburbs. Uber can ignore those constraints. The company’s local team is also busy juicing demand by doing things like event sponsorships, and outreach to local businesses. An out-of-the-way restaurant, for example, might want to tell its patrons about Uber so they can rest assured about getting home when they’re done enjoying the wine list. Of course, Uber’s real magic is software. It has also been refining how it expands to each new city. “Every minute and every day we’re collecting more and more data on where people are opening our app to figure out where biggest areas of demand are,” Holt says. That’s why we’ve needed a little runway ahead of a public launch.” Charts and heat map visualizations show how the app is being used, that the company then uses to match peak demand areas at specific times. It looks at specific pieces of data like app opens, people who get cars, and people who can’t, and the number of minutes that it takes for cars to arrive. The other factor is operations. Uber has been recruiting local people, including independent operators and small companies, to be on call for the service. It has already won many of them over, judging by the ones I’ve talked to in SF, and the one who drove us on Thanksgiving. Its pay structure is a flat fee that includes a generous tip. The software can calculate optimal coverage areas to reduce driving. And the software also cuts out dispatch operators, who sometimes play favorites with drivers at other cab companies. While Uber is a luxury service, it’s also a good example of how a software startup can break into new physical-world markets and solve long-standing problems. It forces incumbents to try to improve, and shows other startups how they can go after similar types of problems. It’s this visceral impact that helped convince Shervin Pishevar, son of an immigrant cab driver in DC, to co-lead the company’s new $32 million round of funding last week. The company is planning on expanding by two cities a month around the world. It also just launched in Paris, and is already available in San Francisco, Seattle, Chicago, New York, and Boston. Latest headlines delivered to you daily StackMob, a backend service provider for mobile, is today publicly launching its mobile app platform, after having been in private beta for a good part of the year. The company, often described as a “Heroku for mobile” is a fully hosted platform that allows developers to address all the backend needs for their mobile apps including OAuth and social service integration (e.g., Twitter, Facebook), storage solutions, advertising, push notifications, analytics, API creation and more. The company closed its Series A round of $7.5 million this spring, led by Trinity Ventures with StackMob’s existing investors, Harrison Metal and Baseline Ventures, participating. With the additional funding in tow, StackMob was able to expand to a second platform beyond iOS this October, when it launched its Android SDK. But at the time, StackMob was still in private beta testing. Since its Series A, StackMob has seen 60% month-over-month grow in apps created using the platforms. Customers now include Fortune 50 hotels, banks and consumer products companies. StackMob has also signed up a top 20 mobile game which makes over 3 million API calls per day. Now available publicly, StackMob is introducing two categories of pricing, with three subcategories each. The “Starter” category, meant for smaller app makers, ranges from free to $29. Pro pricing packages, meanwhile, go from $399 to $2,999. Pro packages have access to all StackMob features, including advanced REST API creation and management, push notifications, social integration, custom code and analytics. Custom packages are also available. Interested developers can sign up for StackMob here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco-based Liftopia, an online retailer of lift tickets and mountain resort activities, is launching its iPhone app today. The app’s title is quite the mouthful: “Liftopia Ski Reports, Snow Conditions and Ultimate Lift Ticket Deal Engine App.” Whoa! So there’s the news, I guess – it’s all in the app’s name. Oh you want more info? OK. The new app, available for iPhone and iPod Touch, lets skiers and snowboarders browse and buy deals on lift tickets and other mountain activities in advance just like Liftopia’s website does. Upon launch, the app taps into your current location to instantly pull up nearby deals. You can also browse through deals in your favorite regions or search deals by date. Whe you’re ready to purchase, you can buy the tickets directly from the app itself. All your activity in the app is synced back to the Liftopia.com website, too, so if you prefer to shop online, you can just use the app to access your tickets on the go instead of having to print out and carry vouchers with you to the resort. Handy. Other features in the app include the ability to check conditions and weather reports, get directions to the lifts, store resorts as “favorites,” set up deal alerts and more. Liftopia now offers over 75,000 deals at more than 150 ski areas which are up to 80% off ticket window prices. Current partners include Aspen/Snowmass, Park City, Mount Snow, Sun Valley, Squaw Valley/Alpine Meadows and others. The startup recently raised $1.3 million in funding from First Round Capital and others, bringing its total raise to nearly $3 million. Seriously, though, what’s with the app title? App Store SEO? Latest headlines delivered to you daily VerticalResponse, which provides self-service digital marketing solutions, has acquired Roost, a privately held social media marketing technology company based in San Francisco.  Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. VerticalResponse users can now sign up to create, schedule, manage and measure their social media marketing campaigns from a single dashboard across platforms like Twitter and Facebook. Janine Popick, VerticalResponse’s CEO, in a statement points out that this is the first acquisition the company has completed in more than a decade in business. In the coming months, VerticalResponse plans to integrate its email and social media marketing tools more deeply, add more features and support for more social networks, and enhance its digital marketing platform’s reporting features. Following the acquisition, Roost CEO Alex Chang will serve as Vice President, Social Platform.  Roost actually started out as a real estate search engine, raising more than $13 million over the years. They pivoted to creating social media management software for small businesses back in 2010 – looks like they made the right choice.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’ve seen too many recipe websites. It’s okay – so have I. But Punchfork is doing things a little differently by leveraging hardcore algorithms to curate the best recipes found on the Web based on social network chatter, in realtime. Punchfork has built a sophisticated algorithm that measures a how many times a recipe posted by its publishing partners gets shared on social networks like Twitter and Facebook and sites like StumbleUpon. The higher a recipe’s score based on Punchfork’s technology, on a scale from 1 to 100, the more it should have been talked about and shared on the Web. In essence, the website lets you find out which dishes are in vogue these days, and tells you how to prepare them yourself. The company also offers an API for developers who are interested in integrating recipes from Punchfork’s publisher partners into their own websites or apps. And of course, there’s a brand new, free app for that: check out Punchfork for iPhone and iPad here. The recipe discovery platform company was founded by Jeff Miller, also the creator of Hacker News-inspired Bitly News, with $20,000 of his own money. Punchfork is up against some venture-backed companies, including Gojee, Foodily and Yummly.  Now if you’ll excuse me, I have some chicken paninis to prepare. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’ve seen too many recipe websites. It’s okay – so have I. But Punchfork is doing things a little differently by leveraging hardcore algorithms to curate the best recipes found on the Web based on social network chatter, in realtime. Punchfork has built a sophisticated algorithm that measures a how many times a recipe posted by its publishing partners gets shared on social networks like Twitter and Facebook and sites like StumbleUpon. The higher a recipe’s score based on Punchfork’s technology, on a scale from 1 to 100, the more it should have been talked about and shared on the Web. In essence, the website lets you find out which dishes are in vogue these days, and tells you how to prepare them yourself. The company also offers an API for developers who are interested in integrating recipes from Punchfork’s publisher partners into their own websites or apps. And of course, there’s a brand new, free app for that: check out Punchfork for iPhone and iPad here. The recipe discovery platform company was founded by Jeff Miller, also the creator of Hacker News-inspired Bitly News, with $20,000 of his own money. Punchfork is up against some venture-backed companies, including Gojee, Foodily and Yummly.  Now if you’ll excuse me, I have some chicken paninis to prepare. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, it’s been an interesting last few weeks (and last few years, for that matter) for Israeli-headquartered video-conferencing specialist, RadVision. Acquisition rumors are currently swirling around the company, based on Israeli newspaper Globes’ report that the company is in ‘advanced’ talks with Avaya, a business collaboration and communications company, for a sale of approximately $200 million. The official word we’ve received from RadVision spokespeople is that, of course, they do not comment on “rumors or speculation”. But our Israeli sources did say, without confirming, that an acquisition will very likely happen, even if it doesn’t end up at $200 million. As Globes points out, RadVision has been looking for a potential acquisition candidate since late 2009, when its largest client, Cisco Systems (which accounted for about one-third of its revenue), bought its Norwegian videoconferencing rival, Tandberg, for $3.3 billion. Since then, RadVision has been on the defense, looking for — but not finding — the right candidate, losing money, as further talks with HP broke down last year when the two could not agree on price. Yet, over recent weeks, RadVision’s stock has gone from sinking to soaring, up 108 percent since November 29th on acquisition rumors, and holding a market cap of about $180 million. (Of course, after hours trading was not so kind to the company, as shares tumbled 12 percent Wednesday.)  As to Avaya, it announced plans for an IPO back in June, but the public offering has been repeatedly delayed. Meanwhile, over the last year, Avaya has made a number of acquisitions of late, and with quite a few unified communications products, video conferencing among them, RadVision would be a nice pick-up — if they can be convinced it’s worth $200 million. Interestingly, amidst all this coverage and speculation, RadVision quietly announced today that it is ramping up its offerings for SMBs, rolling out a suite of video solutions that is intended to bring the company’s enterprise video solution to startups and small business for a much lower cost than traditional, full-scale solutions.  RadVision is clearly hoping that by offering high definition audio, video, and content sharing, like HD video room system capabilities with embedded multi-party conferencing, desktop conferencing with firewall traversal, and support for mobile in packaged solutions, it will be able to find a new audience for products and boost revenues. The leg-up for RadVision is that they have a robust suite of enterprise-grade conferencing products, especially for the European market, but startups like AnyMeeting are also offering web-based video conferencing and webinar services — for free.  Granted, they don’t have the same scale or number of features, but with its recent announcement that it is now offering Google Apps integration to enable web conferencing to Google users in a single sign-on solution — on top of six-way video conferencing, the ability to host meetings of up to 200 attendees with no time limits, screen sharing, app sharing, recording, and social media integration — the competition from U.S. startups is at least moving in the right direction. AnyMeeting is just one example. RadVision still has a robust suite of communication tools, and expanding to offer support to SMBs certainly helps its case, but we’ll see what happens to the price as it attempts to ink a deal with Avaya. We’ll update as we learn more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Not many startups can lay claim to being part of two recognizable accelerators at the same time, but 72Lux would be one of those exceptions. The New York City-based luxury eCommerce startup was selected as a member of 500 Startups’ third batch of companies this October and was also chosen to participate in the fourth “vintage” of NYC accelerator, First Growth Venture Networks, at about the same time. Has 72Lux found a way to be in two places at once? No, the truth is that FGVN does not promise investment in exchange for a stake in the company, as 500 Startups does (and Y Combinator, TechStars, etc.), so technically FGVN is a mentorship network and community, even though it looks and smells like an accelerator. Thus, there’s no love lost here, it’s a win-win situation, especially for 72Lux. So why the interest in this young fashion startup? Well, for starters, 72Lux has built a shopping destination of high-end fashion apparel and accessories that is specifically targeted at women, so it’s capitalizing on an active, engaged demographic in a rapidly expanding (online) market. The other factor in play is that the startup is making a serious attempt at simplifying the shopping experience, by partnering with top designers and retailers to allow users to browse and buy all in one place.  It’s a bit like Yipit for fashion shopping, or Amazon, but it’s exclusively high-end apparel, mostly for women. Sure, there are quite a few eTailers for women’s high-end fashion, but few of them offer an internally-built, universal checkout mechanism that allows users to make purchases on-site. This means that you can browse by category, designer, size, color, or any combination thereof, and once you’ve selected what you want to buy, go through a single checkout channel, even if you’re purchasing goods from a different retailers. The startup also licenses this universal checkout to provide enterprise publishers with a turnkey eCommerce solution — and a complementary revenue stream. And this leads to the startup’s big value proposition — something that hasn’t been talked about much. On the surface, 72Lux looks like a consumer destination site, but Founder and CEO Heather Marie tells us that the team’s real focus is on SaaS. The startup is now officially ready to announce that it has developed software that allows websites to offer their very own integrated eCommerce platform.  Essentially, this means that enterprise websites can now white label the startup’s universal checkout, and easily integrate eCommerce directly into their own website. Not only that, but 72Lux is offering a similar product for smaller digital publishers and bloggers, meaning that pretty much any site that reviews, blogs, or discusses products can allow users to purchase those products directly from their website. Below you’ll see a mockup the 72Lux team created for one of TechCrunch’s holiday Gift Guides to give you a sense of what this would look like. (To be clear: This is just a mock-up, TechCrunch is not selling any products.)  Obviously, this is a bit similar in nature to buttons that PayPal offers to their small business clients (like the “Donate” button), except without the painful controls and problems associated with doing business with PayPal. Now bloggers and content producers can begin monetizing their content directly, partnering with the designers and retailers that offer those products, taking a cut — or not. 72Lux has started with fashion, so in this scope, smaller fashion outlets, blogs, publications, and more can easily integrate an eCommerce solution into their sites to begin selling directly to customers. Traditionally, it’s been easier for eCommerce companies to become content providers than it has for content producers to become agents of eCommerce, and Marie says that the latter is exactly what she wants 72Lux to enable. With a universal checkout, normalized product catalogs, and a suite of embeddable tools, the startup is hoping that it can convince enterprises (and smaller publishers) that working with them and their retail partners to offer an integrated solution will be easier than going it alone. The intent has been to build a one-stop luxury eCommerce solution, and now it’s to spread its white label solution across blogs and publisher sites with embeddable tools and checkout features, just as Facebook Connect brought the social network to the far reaches of the Web. Well, that’s a bit of a reach, but you know where I’m going. There are quite a few analogues. And to aid it in its SaaSy quest, the startup has raised an advisory investment round from 500 Startups as well as Thomas Varghese and several angel investors through AngelList. And obviously it also helps to be part of 500 Startups accelerator as well as First Growth Venture’s network.  Marie said that the company has also struck deals with a few big enterprise partners, but could not say more than that. So no doubt we’ll be hearing some more news from 72Lux over the next few months. Stay tuned. For more, check out 72Lux at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As you may have heard, Google is getting into the holiday giving spirit these days, as it late last night announced that it has dished out an additional $40 million in philanthropic grants, targeted at science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM), girls’ education, and even fighting slavery. (You can read more in Google.org SVP Shona Brown’s blog post here.)  These grants brought the total that Google has funneled into nonprofit and academic institutions over the course of the year to $115 million — and that’s on top of the $1 billion the company invests in programs like Google Grants, Google Apps for Education, which offer free support and services to non-profits and educational institutions. As part of the $115 million in philanthropic grants awarded over this year, Google has funded 16 programs in STEM and “girls’ education” (nine of which are in the U.S.) for a total of $14.7 million. These programs include the Tech Museum of Innovation, the D.C. Public Education Fund, Girl Scouts of Northern California, the Computer History Museum, Boston-based Citizen Schools, and U.K.-based Generating Genius. The rest include: In support of girls’ education, Google also dished out funding to the African Leadership Academy, which “provides merit scholarships to promising young women”, as well as across the continent, and the Afghan Institute of Learning, which brings literacy to the young women of rural Afghanistan. Others include: Google also awarded 14 grants to recognize “the entrepreneurial spirit” behind companies using the Web, open source programming, and other tech platforms to improve access to information — something Google has obviously long been passionate about. These include companies like Vittana, which offers loans to students with great credit history in the developing world, Code For America, which received a grant of $1.5 million in an attempt to help governments become more transparent, connected, and efficient by connecting web developers to leaders in civic services. DoSomething.org also received $2 million in funding to help connect mobile and wired teens with causes they care about, as well as Switchboard, a company that helps African health care works connect with local mobile providers to create free networks and communications channels. The other 10 organizations include: The last portion, $11.5 million, was apportioned to organizations that will help free people from modern-day slavery, which you can read about here.  There are some amazing companies in this list of grant recipients, and Google has clearly spent more than a little time researching some of the more inspiring and big-picture-minded non-profits and technology companies operating out there today. Sure, this is just the season when Google spends some time promoting its charitable grants, but if you have a few minutes, it’s worth checking these organizations out. There’s a lot of value here.  For more, check out the video below:Excerpt Image credit to Gayle Laakmann McDowell  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The guy who helped bring you Crate, a dead simple file-sharing service, are now testing something called Gumroad, a way to ask folks to pay for downloads. The site is very basic – you enter a URL, a price, and share the link. Users are asked for a credit card number (don’t buy that, it’s just this) to buy the item and sellers pay 5% plus 30 cents for each sale.  The system is aimed at ad hoc sales and the seller protections are nearly non-existent. The download link isn’t  obfuscated. Instead it’s hidden until Gumroad shows it to you after your purchase. There is nothing stopping folks from, say, sharing the download link later with friends and family. However, like Louis CK’s experiment, this site assumes humans are good, kind, and honest – a fatal assumption in many cases.   There are plenty of ways to deliver content. This is simply the next step in the equation – monetizing said content to everyone’s benefit. I could see Dropbox, for example, adding a “Pay Me For This” link and making a lot of money in the process, but I suspect they don’t want to sully the overall file sharing experience with financial transactions.  Gumroad makes sense. There are plenty of things I’d love to sell if I had the option – early access to podcasts, naked photos of myself, etc. – if I only had the means to do it quickly and easily. By making sales as simple as clicking one button, Gumroad opens up a vista of opportunity in the world of simple micropayments. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been a while since we’ve written about DIY online shop, Zazzle. But the company has grown to be one of the largest customization companies out there, with 20 million unique visitors a month. And today the company is pressing forward with developing its own innovative new ways to help users more accurately customize and visualize their products.  For eShopping, one of the next big technology trends will see augmented reality and artificial intelligence allowing customers to try on clothes without actually being in-store, test products, and so on before buying them.  As to its own play into this world, Zazzle is today announcing AR technology that will show online shoppers exactly what art, prints, canvass wraps, photos, etc. will look like on their office or home walls. Online art buyers — both high end and not — are generally lacking in ways to accurately visualize art on their walls, which is something that we’d all like to do, especially before committing a sizable chunk of our income to a specific piece.  Using its so-called “Zazzle Realview” technology, shoppers can easily snap a picture and upload it to the site, then interact with 3D-rendered photos to see (in realtime) how the prints will appear on their very own walls. Users can upload personal graphics or photos, or choose from thousands online — and as they make changes to size and frame type, for example, those changes are instantly reflected in Realview’s visualizations. What’s cool about this is that Realview works for all art, personal or stock art on Zazzle, regardless of price, allowing you to check it out via AR. Of course, Zazzle is not alone here. Art.com, Panasonic, and even Lego have comparable AR services, but Zazzle thinks that by offering features like automatic calibration of user placement, simulated lighting over products, interactive view of a 3D model with a webcam, as well as high-res views of customizable products within a user environment, they’ve got a leg up on the competition. It’s pretty cool: The company’s patent-pending computational photography tech combines computer graphics, object recognition, image processing and digital photography to produce interactive assets. While most other AR in this space are processing video data at around 1 to 1.5 megapixels, Realview ups that to between 5 and 6 megapixels, which Zazzle hopes will put it in the “glossy” web magazine space.  It seems like a niche space, but Zazzle is currently processing billions of dollars in customize products each year, and sees millions of art buyers and visitors each month — which brings some neat technology to a fairly wide audience and to a space that traditionally suffers from legacy models. For more, check Realview out here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A slice of good news for gamers: Today, TeamSpeak, a company which makes voice communications systems to let gamers chat while playing games, has partnered with Overwolf to begin offering gamers some serious suped-up social and voice communications functionality during gameplay. TeamSpeak users can install a simple widget to get in-game notifications, chat, the ability to change voice settings, and manage channels without leaving the comfort of their favorite MMO games.  For those unfamiliar with Overwolf, the Israeli startup that makes software to overlay social media in games, the company’s mission is, put simply, to “Zynga-fy online games” (in a good way), providing a software client that seamlessly adds a social layer to games, providing us with a convenient way to share achievements, access Facebook, Twitter, Skype, MSN, web browsers, and gameplay recording while playing multiplayer online games. Obviously, neither company is without competition in the gaming world, especially Overwolf, as the ‘socialization of everything’ has certainly come to games in full force, but for game publishers, Overwolf provides an easy way to integrate social media within games to boost virality and reduce user acquisition costs without touching a line of code. Overwolf has partnered with companies like Frogster Online Gaming, Games-Masters, gPotato and Aeria Games, which have launched their own branded versions of the service as a way to connect their online games with various social platforms. It’s a great way for gamers to interact with other members, post screenshots or videos, search databases for new tricks, cheats, and explanations while playing games, and Overwolf is hoping that by providing a channel into already-existing social networks they can bypass having to create their own gaming social network from scratch. TeamSpeak, too, has been looking for easier ways to boost their in-game support, so with their new partnership with Overwolf, both are able to offer a deep set of communications tools that players already had on the desktop during the online, in-game experience. Overwolf CEO Uri Marchand said that gamers and Overwolf users have been champing at the bit to get TeamSpeak support, as TeamSpeak has become very popular among online gamers, which use the service to strategize and speak to other team members while playing, including realtime voice chat, file sharing, and so on. While many game development companies have been trying to enhance user experience by offering more social tools, Twitter and Facebook integration, YouTube support and so on (as we wrote of Trion in April), this partnership between TeamSpeak and Overwolf could be of great value to smaller development operations that don’t have the time or resources to build social and communications functionality from scratch. For more, check out Overwolf here and TeamSpeak here, or the video below for more on how the partnership works in-game:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’re hungry. You’re feeling social. But you’re also feeling laaaaazy, and planning a big group meal can be so much work that you end up hating everyone at the table by the end of it. GrubWithUs, a startup best known for organizing buy-in dinners with overarching themes (TechCrunch fans!) or at least one particularly interesting person at the table, is playing with the idea of building dinners for the most interesting person of all: you. You punch in a few details, and GrubWithUs does pretty much all of the leg work — but there’s a catch! The new service (which just went live in Chicago first, with a national rollout planned) is aptly dubbed “Create-A-Meal”. You start out by telling it which city you’re looking to grub in, how many grubbers there will be, how much dough the group is willing to cough up per head, and GrubWithUs takes it from there. They find a restaurant, negotiate a menu, and send out the invites. They’ll even handle the check-splitting (read: the part that makes you hate your friends) beforehand. The catch: Much like Priceline or Hotwire’s hotel search, you don’t know what the restaurant will be until the deal is sealed. GrubWithUs says they’re “committed to only working with the top restaurants in the city”, though, so you probably don’t have to worry that your mystery meal will end up being Taco Bell’s $10 Grande Box. GrubWithUs says they’ll gladly work around dietary restrictions — so if you’ve got a friend who only eats cardboard, toast, and fish killed on Fridays, be sure to let them know. Until now, there was no way for anyone outside of GrubWithUs to build meals. Any meals listed on the site were organized by their sales team in coordination with local restaurants. Meals are private by default, though you can open them up to the public (and listed on GrubWithUs) if you’re looking to break bread with some new pals. You can find the new Create-Your-Own page here. Note that while the page seems to load regardless of what city you’re in, the company says the feature is Chicago-only for the time being. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Only one week after Flipboard’s highly anticipated launch on the iPhone (and iPod Touch), the company is announcing it has added 1 million users to its service and has tripled its engagement. According to the company, that means it now has over 5 million users in total using the app across the iOS platform. Before last week’s release, Flipboard had registered 650 million flips per month on the iPad. Now it’s trending towards 2 billion flips per month. “Flips,” for those who don’t get the Flipboard lingo, refers to swiping within the app in order to turn the page. The magazine-like experience provided by Flipboard has long been one of the most popular iPad applications, having previously been named Apple’s iPad App of the Year for 2010 and Time Magazine’s Top 50 Inventions. In fact, the iPhone launch was so hot, that Flipboard actually went down for hours. New in the iPhone version is a feature called “Cover Stories,” which is based on the relevance-matching technology Flipboard acquired with Ellerdale in 2010. This uses reader interactions like tweets, retweets and likes alongside manual curation to surface a personalized set of top stories. Despite its many accolades, not everyone loves the Flipboard way of reading. Our own John Biggs notoriously gave the app a “Die” in “Fly or Die,” but he might just be in the minority. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Personal finance service (and TechCrunch Disrupt alum) Credit Sesame is launching its first mobile application today which gives users instant access to their current financial standing and their credit score. For free. And I don’t mean “free” as in free, but if you don’t read the fine print we’ll sign you up for our monthly service.  I mean free as in free. For those of you unfamiliar with Credit Sesame, the young startup helps users better understand their personal finances. But unlike Mint, which looks at a person’s bank accounts, investments, budget, goals and loans, Credit Sesame is primarily focused on credit and loans. Using the same technology as banks, the company is able to analyze a user’s complete debt situation and then recommend various loan and credit options that can save them money . However, Credit Sesame isn’t paid for lead generation, so it doesn’t just hand over customers’ information to banks and lenders in order to generate revenue. Instead, it only receives payment when a customer signs up for one of its recommendations.  With the new mobile application, customers will be able to do much of what you could previously do only via the website, including sign up for an account, access your financial information, check your credit score, view your available credit and debt payments and more. It’s important to note that when you check your credit score via the app, it doesn’t ding your credit, as it would when a company runs a credit check for you to determine whether you qualify for a new credit card, store card or loan, for example. The score comes from Experian. For now, consumers can use this information to get a general idea as to their financial health, but in the future, Credit Sesame will provide more specific guidance. (“Can I get a Macy’s card?”, “Can I buy this car?” are some example that come to mind). Credit Sesame secures your information using bank-grade security approved by VeriSign and McAfee, protects mobile users’ data behind a PIN and enables you to switch off mobile access if your phone is lost or stolen. In addition, although the service requires your Social Security Number upon sign-up, this information is not stored on the phone. According to founder Adrian Nazari, the startup helps two out of three people find “substantial” savings, even if not everyone chooses to act on its recommendations. He won’t disclose the size of the user base yet, but hints that it’s now in the six digits. The company raised $6.15 million from Menlo Ventures this March, and has been growing steadily since. The mobile app is first available for the iPhone, but an Android app will follow shortly. You can download the new app from here on iTunes. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s always heartening to see an experiment in disintermediated content succeed and it couldn’t have happened to a better guy. Louis CK began selling his one-hour comedy special on his own website for $5 a pop last Sunday and, as of today, he’s reporting he’s made over $500,000 from 110,000 downloads. This is a profit of over $200,000 on a concert that cost him about $170,000 to film and edit (most of that paid with ticket sales) and a website that cost $32,000 to build (which suggests that I’m in the wrong line of work. Carlos Mencia: Call me. I know HTML). He breaks down the finance below: Basically he’s proven that someone with a dedicated fan base (arguably a huge one) can make his or her own way in the world without the studio model. This should make a large number of folks who “curate” content for sale very, very nervous but it also points to the need for modern entertainers to understand every little thing about their industry. You can’t just be “talent” anymore unless you really want to be. However, by lying back and waiting for a “producer” to make things happen you’re risking a loss of financial opportunity and artistic control. You often can’t have it two ways but, to be fair, not everyone can be Louis CK. To his credit, Louis learned quite a bit from the experience. He spouts philosophical below. Amen, Mr. CK.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Talent drain? That’s what they’re saying. The explosion of early stage startups has made it harder for companies to find the best engineers and designers because everyone’s trying to do their own startup. GroupTalent (a startup, of course) wants to be the solution for that. In an effort to make the process of finding work even less painful than before, today the company is launching a newly revamped website which introduces a matching algorithm that automatically pairs projects and talent together. GroupTalent doesn’t want to be considered as just another job board or hiring marketplace. Unlike oDesk or Elance, where there’s more emphasis on catering to employers looking for freelancers, at GroupTalent, there’s more of a focus on the talent itself. Most of the startup’s market comes from early stage founders who are looking for gigs to help them extend their runway, says Manuel Medina, GroupTalent CEO. “The majority of our talent base are teams from startups who are bootstrapping,” he says. “Many are funded, many are from accelerator programs such as YC, TechStars, 500 Startups, and then there are those who are just getting started. Most of them are tired of ramen.” In other words, just because it’s increasingly hard to recruit someone talented willing to work full-time, that doesn’t mean there aren’t talented folks willing to work. The biggest difference between GroupTalent and other job boards is the curation aspect to the service. Only 20% of all applicants get in, as the company denies those it doesn’t believe meets a certain quality bar. This filtering process is currently done through manual review in combination with some algorithms that rank the applicants based on open source contributions. To date, GroupTalent has received applications from over 500 developers and designers from 300 teams who have completed $200,0000 worth of projects. Typically, projects submitted range from $10,000 to $100,000. With today’s addition of the automatic job-matching feature, the company is able to match projects with talent who already know their way around a given problem space. For now, explains Medina, “the demographic that we’ve found gravitating to our service early on is other startups who want a specialist to knock out an entire app,” he says. “In the future, we believe a good customer segment for us will be larger companies who want to bring in experienced developers to move quickly and build out an idea in the fraction of the time an internal team would take. Sort of startups-for-hire.” You can check out the new refresh of GroupTalent here. The first 10 companies to submit projects using the code TALENTCRUNCH will not be charged for the standard match and management fee (a 20% discount).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Anthony Ha, who previously worked for tech blog Venturebeat, reports on Adweek that SAY Media has acquired tech blog ReadWriteWeb. He also says Dan Frommer, former editor at tech blog Silicon Alley Insider and founder of tech blog SplatF, will be joining tech blog ReadWriteWeb as its new editor-at-large. The news comes shortly after Marshall Kirkpatrick, who has long been a senior writer for tech blog ReadWriteWeb after working as a reporter for tech blog TechCrunch, announced that he would be leaving his fulltime position at tech blog ReadWriteWeb. Sarah Perez, who recently joined tech blog TechCrunch after writing for tech blog ReadWriteWeb, says she has no comments to share about the deal for the time being. Update: looks like Adweek pulled the story after prematurely pulling the trigger. Press release below and RWW blog post here. Founded in 2003 by Richard MacManus, ReadWriteWeb has grown into one of the most popular tech blogs in the world, currently ranking #10 on the Techmeme leaderboard. (On a sidenote: looks like there aren’t a lot of big, independent tech blogs left now) We’re trying to get a hold of tech blogger Dan Frommer for an official statement on his role at the newly acquired tech blog. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. I’m guessing Ha moved (a little too?) fast, because there aren’t any official statements on the SAY Media blog or tech blogs ReadWriteWeb and SplatF yet. Expect some soon. Say Media, which is the result of a merger of Six Apart and VideoEgg, has been on an acquisition spree of late. The company has picked up companies like Dogster, Sideshow and Remodelista. Update: here’s the press release: SAY Media Acquires ReadWriteWeb SAN FRANCISCO – Dec. 14, 2011 – SAY Media today announced it has acquired ReadWriteWeb, one of the most popular and influential technology publications in the world, to anchor its growing Technology channel that reaches more than 75 million global consumers each month. Founder and editor-in-chief Richard MacManus will continue to lead ReadWriteWeb as part of SAY Media’s rapidly expanding editorial team. In addition to ReadWriteWeb’s current staff, new star writers will contribute to the renowned technology publication, starting with Dan Frommer, founder and editor-in-chief of SplatF, who will serve as editor-at-large. “ReadWriteWeb has established itself as a leading news and analysis source for the tech community, reaching high-level business influencers and decision makers. Its editorial team is frequently sourced and considered to be one of the best in the business,” said Matt Sanchez, CEO, SAY Media. “As we looked to acquire a property that would further strengthen our technology channel, ReadWriteWeb naturally rose to the top of the list. Richard and his team are extremely passionate about the content they create and have worked very hard to develop a deeply engaged and informed community of tech enthusiasts.” As part of SAY Media’s portfolio of owned and operated media properties, ReadWriteWeb will take advantage of the company’s proprietary technology platform, experienced ad sales team, and world-class design expertise to scale its business to reach more technology enthusiasts and decision-makers. Under SAY’s guidance, the site will continue to evolve through design and user experience innovations that align with SAY’s Clean Campaign vision, and also expand its editorial scope to appeal to a wider array of technology consumers. “We’re incredibly excited to be joining SAY Media and believe this partnership will help us better serve our community of readers,” said Richard MacManus, founder and editor-in-chief, ReadWriteWeb. “With SAY’s technology and services we’ll be able to scale ReadWriteWeb in ways previously unavailable to us. We’ll now be able to expand our editorial scope into relevant areas of interest and redesign the site to create a more premium experience for both our readers and advertisers.” This acquisition will strengthen SAY’s Tech channel offering by giving brands an assortment of custom advertising opportunities that leverage the influence and authority of voices like Richard MacManus and Dan Frommer and the reach of SAY’s broader network of technology properties to connect brands with engaged audiences. Current sites in SAY Media’s Tech channel include: Android and Me, Gear Patrol, gdgt, SplatF, TechDirt and more. “ReadWriteWeb covers the tech industry with a high level of integrity and intellectual curiosity. I can’t wait to add my voice to the site, as I report on technology trends around the world,” said Dan Frommer, founder and editor-in-chief, SplatF and editor-at-large, ReadWriteWeb. As SAY continues on its path to become the undisputed home of passion-based, vertical media properties, the company will continue to partner with, build and acquire sites that create quality content with a point-of-view and maintainvibrant, engaged communities. About ReadWriteWebReadWriteWeb is one of the most popular technology blogs in the world, known for offering insightful analysis about each day’s Internet industry news. ReadWriteWeb was founded in April 2003 by Richard MacManus and is now one of the most widely read and respected blogs in the world. Its readers are smart and influential decision makers. For more information visit http://www.readwriteweb.com. About SAY MediaSAY Media is a digital publishing company that turns strong, culturally relevant voices into premium digital media experiences. Through its technology platform and media services, SAY enables its portfolio of independent content creators to build passionate communities around key consumer interest areas such as Style, Living, Food and Tech. The company provides simple and accountable ways for the world’s top brands to engage with these passionate audiences, at scale, with a reach of more than 500 million people around the world. SAY Media is headquartered in San Francisco, with offices across North America, in the UK and Australia. For more information visit: http://www.saymedia.com. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Car sharing network operator Zipcar this morning announced the exercise of its option to purchase a majority ownership interest in Barcelona-based Catalunya Carsharing, better known as Avancar, after investing in the company almost exactly two years ago. In fact, the option had been extended for an extra year after Zipcar decided last year it wouldn’t yet exercise it, opting instead to give Avancar a loan that could be converted into equity. As things stand today, Zipcar owns a controlling stake of 60 percent in Avancar, which operates a fleet of vehicles throughout the cities of Barcelona and Sant Cugat del Valles.  Said Scott Griffith, chairman and CEO of Zipcar: “We expect Barcelona to be a top tier car sharing city in the years to come and a key part of our developing network of European cities.  With the integration of our acquired U.K. operations completed, we have shifted our focus to expanding our European reach.” Avancar was founded in 2005 to become the first car sharing operator in Spain. Also read: Zipcar Members Can Now Reserve A Car On Facebook Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, content discovery platform Outbrain is announcing it has secured $35 million in Series D funding in a round led by Index Ventures. Existing investors Carmel Ventures and Lightspeed Venture Partners also participated in the round. As a part of the deal, Dominique Vidal, partner at Index Ventures, will join the company’s Board of Directors. The New York-based startup helps online publishers recommend additional content to their site’s readers through a website widget technology. The system combines contextual analysis, collaborative filtering (people who like X, also like Y) and personalization to determine which links to show readers at a given time. The personalization of the links shown is based on cookies, but is not tied to any personally identifiable information, nor is the data collected by one publisher shared with another. You see Outbrain’s technology in action everywhere, but you probably don’t realize it. Its “recommended reading” widgets often show up at the bottom of a publisher’s page as sections titled “You might like:,” “We Recommend,” and “Elsewhere on the Web,” for example. The service suggests two types of links to readers: inbound links to the publisher’s own content, which are not paid for, and outbound links to content on other sites which are paid for by Outbrain’s buyers, and involve a revenue share. Currently, publishers using Outbrain’s technology include CNN, Fox News, Future Publishing, Hearst, Hachette Filipacchi Media, IPC, Mashable, MSNBC, Reuters UK, Sky News, Slate, Trinity Mirror and Ziff Davis. The company also works with brands and agencies like Digitas, Mindshare, P&G, Allstate and American Express. Outbrain’s recommendations are now viewed more than 3.5 billion times per month, generating over 200 million monthly clicks, the company reports. A growing number of those publishers are now using Outbrain’s newly launched mobile product, says Outbrain CEO Yaron Galai. Even though it’s only a few months old, mobile now accounts for 5%-10% of Outbrain’s business. With the Outbrain for Mobile widget, publishers can now add the same “recommended” sections to their mobile sites which link exclusively to other mobile-optimized content. Video is another newer focus for the company, based on publisher demands. For publishers, explains Galai, “content is content” and they want one system to recommend it all. The video recommendation technology has been soft-launched and is live now on some partner websites. A public announcement will follow shortly. Going forward, Outbrain wants to continue to expand to any platform where people are consuming content, says Galai, a statement which hints at the still untapped e-reader market. As a result of this additional funding, which brings Outbrain’s total raise to $64 million, the company will focus on investing in both business development and global expansion. Outbrain had already been working towards these goals through its acquisition of Surphace from AOL (disclosure: TechCrunch is owned by AOL) and the opening of new offices in London, Paris and Hamburg. Going forward, there will be further moves into Europe as well as Asia. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ecwid, a Russian startup that enables people to set up an online store on their website or on a social network in mere minutes, has raised its first round of institutional funding, securing $1.5 million from Runa Capital.  The e-commerce software company says it currently has over 100,000 customers in 174 countries, but given that about 40 percent of its customers are located in the United States, Ecwid will part of the capital to open its first office in Mountain View, California in early 2012. In addition, Ecwid will establish an office in the UK in the spring of 2012, since roughly 30 percent of its customers are small business owners and Web studios based in the European Union. The company provides a platform agnostic, AJAX-powered store builder widget that enables users to easily embed a fully functional online store into any Website, mobile site or social network page. Ecwid’s widget is free to stores with fewer than 100 products, with monthly plans for bigger stores starting at $17. Payments can be handled through all major vendors, including PayPal, Google Checkout and Authorize.net. Video tutorial embedded below. The drop-in store builder is available in 37 languages and integrates with major CMS and site builder platforms like WordPress, Joomla and Drupal as well as all blogging software and social networks including Facebook, Ning or any other OpenSocial-enabled network. Ecwid currently has 18 employees based in its Ulyanovsk, Russia headquarters, many of whom hail from PHP shopping cart maker X-Cart.Ecwid. Getting Started. from Ecwid Team on Vimeo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Database virtualization startup Xeround has raised $9.3 million in Series C funding Benchmark Capital, Giza Venture Capital, Ignition Partners and Trilogy Partnership. This brings the startup’s total funding to over $30 million. Xeround offers a cloud database-as-a-service for MySQL-based applications. Currently the service is offered for EC2 MySQL databases, as well as Rackspace-MySQL and Heroku-MySQL applications.  Xeround’s cloud database allows service providers, ISVs and customers to run their applications in the cloud and automatically scale up or down, all while ensuring availability in the event of failure or schema changes. The startup promises auto-scaling, elastic-usage, high availability and multi-tenancy, while guaranteeing continuous service during schema changes, resource modifications and the scaling process. Xeround’s service currently has hundreds of paying customers. Xeround, which competes with Salesforce’s Database.com, will use the funding to expand its cloud database solution as well as further marketing and sales operations. Latest headlines delivered to you daily PowerCloud Systems, a spin-out of Palo Alto Research Center (PARC) that offers a ‘networking-as-a-service’ platform for OEMs and service providers, has raised $6 million in Series B funding in a round led by Qualcomm Ventures, with prior backers Walden Venture Capital, Javelin Venture Partners and PARC participating. The capital will be used to enhance the company’s online software platform, CloudCommand. The CloudCommand platform enables networking OEMs and service providers to integrate cloud capabilities with their wireless and wired networking equipment and to deliver networking-as-a-service-based solutions for SMBs.  CloudCommand’s initial implementations support Wi-Fi networking, and in 2012 the company says it will expand into additional networking categories. PowerCloud Systems is not only a spin-out from PARC, but its technology is also supported by intellectual property developed at the research center, including 10 patents in areas ranging from cloud-virtualized network controllers to usable security.  The company has raised approximately $10 million to date. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – KidZui, maker of family-friendly Internet products like a safe browser and a video destination for kids, has scored another $2.4 million in funding from existing investors, led by Mission Ventures and Costella Kirsch. The capital will be used for the development of a new video production division dubbed Zui Studios. Part of the funding will also be used for the promotion of the first show (Zui Buzz, see below) and the further development of Zui.com, which the company bills as the safest one-stop content aggregator and search engine for kids. KidZui has recruited Adam Jacobs, who will oversee all content creation for the division, as Executive Producer for Zui Studios. Jacobs, who was nominated for two Emmy awards for direction, headed On-Air promotions for Time Warner Cable, and wrote for the HBO series Tales From the Dark Side. Zui Buzz, the first Zui Studios production, is a daily update for kids about what is trending on the Web, including the best videos, sites and games, which will air on the Zui.com homepage. The company will also be on the lookout for kids with a sizeable audience and remarkable passion and/or talents on YouTube to promote them to ‘Zui Stars’, aiming to give kids “the viral video stardom they seek without the exposure parents fear”. All comments and video replies are screened by KidZui content curation team, which includes parents and teachers. KidZui founder and CEO Cliff Boro tells me KidZui properties received about 1.8 million unique visitors in November 2011, and keeps on growing across the board. Founded in 2006, Kidzui is based in San Diego, California. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInPixiv Online Artist Community Redesign DemoUnless you live in Japan, chances are you've never heard of Pixiv. Even if you do live in Japan, unless you are young and really into drawing manga characters, chances are you’ve still never heard of Pixiv. But its 3.6 million visitors a month generate an astounding 2.9 billion pageviews.  According to comScore, Pixiv is the 12th largest site in Japan measured by pageviews, slightly bigger than Facebook in Japan. And that’s just on the Web. Pixiv generates another 900 million pageviews a month on mobile phones. All of this for a site that is stil a pretty barebones image board that up until a year ago required a login to see anything.  Pixiv is about to get a major redesign. When I visited Pixiv on my trip to Japan a couple weeks ago, CEO Takanari Katagiri and his team showed me their plans (see video above and screenshots below). A beta of the new site will be ready around Christmas, but 222 TechCrunch readers can sign up now to reserve their spots (use the code “techcrunch”). If you like Can.vas, 4Chan founder Moot’s new image and meme-generating site, Pixiv might appeal to you. Moot himself seems to draw inspiration from Pixiv. In the startup’s shrine-like foyer where visitors can draw a portrait of themselves on one of the tiles, Moot had left some evidence that he too had been there. Drawing is a big hobby in Japan, and Pixiv is a place for people to share their digital drawings. The site has 22 million pictures, with 20,000 to 30,000 new pictures uploaded every day. Nearly all of the pageviews are internally generated by the intensely obsessive community on Pixiv. But the current site is text-heavy. The new design looks a lot like a Facebook feed for illustrations. You can subscribe to other users or friends to see their pictures in your feed, rate them or comment on them, and repost the drawings to your own feed. Pixiv is moving briskly on its own momentum, riding the subculture of Japanese comics-style illustrations. The company has 50 employees, up from 30 a year ago. It doubled revenues to about $8 million (600M Yen) in its last fiscal year ended in June. Next year, Katagiri expects to do $13 million in revenues, mostly from advertising on the site.  This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Launching today on the App Store is a new application called Summly that, in short, attempts to summarize the Web. The app was formerly known as Trimit (which we covered back in July), before Founder (and 16-year-old programmer) Nick D’Aloisio raised a seed round from billionaire Hong Kong investor Li Ka-shing and his investment vehicle, Horizons Ventures. Horizons encouraged D’Aloisio to change his startup’s name to “Summly Limited”, which he has done, all in tune to what we are hearing is a sum of money that’s over $250K, which the startup will use to ramp up hiring, for development, and creating patents. At the very least, it’s a lot of money for a 16-year-old. Do you remember what you were doing at 16? Likelihood is it wasn’t raising seed funding from the world’s billionaires. (I was just learning to tie my shoes.) So what is this Summly app that everyone’s so excited about? Well, in July, I wrote that the value proposition for Trimit was that its web and iOS apps allowed you “to condense content into 1,000, 500, or 140-character summaries. Essentially, Trimit was a text auto summarizer designed to fit all those things you’re reading on a mobile device into concise synopses and share those over SMS, email, Facebook, Twitter in .txt form — all with a few clicks”. Today, the guy that Om calls “the Internet’s new boy genius” has used his new money to enlist the service of veteran programmers to built out the initial architecture around his genetic programming and AI-based tool that he says, “mimics evolution”.  It does this because, as the 16-year-old says, the Web is overloaded with content (I like to think I’ve in some small way contributed to that), so Summly offers the world a simpler browsing and search experience by summarizing content into bite-sized chunks to make it easier to consume.  And it seems to be working. Researchers at MIT, D’Aloisio tells us, have tested Summly’s patent-pending technology and have found that it outperforms the “highest academically published results” by a factor of 30 percent. Why? According to the founder, Summly’s algorithm is able to instantly analyze text and automatically distill it into digestible chunks, doing so as you browse and surf the Web, providing succinct summaries of search results, articles, and Web pages. D’Aloisio was a little more hesitant this time around to discuss the secret sauce that makes his new app tick, but for a glimpse, see our previous post on Trimit to get a sense of what’s behind the app — and how it works in practice. For more, check out Summly on the App Store here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yes, when you think of an “app store”, you probably picture iTunes, the Android Marketplace, or even the Chrome Web App Store or GetJar. That’s because apps live in our browsers and on our mobile devices, right? Sort of. Robert Reich, the Co-founder and CEO of Openspace looks down the road and sees the app-ification of everything — a time when apps will become more like CDs, real, tangible goods — something more than a transitory download. Maybe that sounds a little crazy — just as it probably sounds crazy that Openspace launched an actual brick and mortar “app store” this week in downtown Boulder, Colorado. Which might lead you to think, “but how many brick and mortar CD outlets are left? Isn’t this a little backwards? Apps live on our phones, only sometimes in our hearts, but not in the real world, right?” Reich is fully aware that launching a brick and mortar app store sounds like a silly idea, and he and his team have a sense of humor about it, leading some to ask if it’s a publicity stunt. Of course, it’s not at all: Reich and team are considering opening similar real-world app stores in San Francisco and New York.  But why? The reason for launching a brick and mortar app store is best seen in context with what Openspace — the startup itself — is all about. Openspace launched back in April with the mission to let developers and users bypass app store and operating system fragmentation (and limitations in distribution and monetization channels) by offering an app store that enables you to discover and purchase an application once and use it anywhere, anytime, on any device –- smartphones, tablets, laptops and desktops, Mac or PC. Accompanying its launch was a complementary developer co-op, designed to govern its app store. As the Openspace founders (Reich included) are app developers themselves, the motivation behind the cooperative was, as I wrote at the time:  The reclamation of app monetization and distribution strategies by — and for — developers. By signing up for the co-op, developers can help set the agenda and write the rules that govern the sale of their apps on the Openspace store. Thus, Openspace’s newly launched web app store is attempting to solve the problems inherent in today’s popular app stores, specifically, the fact that there’s a lot of noise — the App Store has categories, but as many know, it’s hard to drill down to subgroups within these categories, and it’s become (with over a million apps published) increasingly difficult for developers to get their apps seen and discovered.  Services like Chomp have launched cool algorithmic search engines to help users discover apps amidst the fracas, and Openspace is combining algorithmic search with good old-fashioned curation and crowdsourcing, via a slightly different approach: Collections. To add more granularity to the process of app discovery, search, and enjoyment, Openspace organizes apps by collections, which means that you can browse by “Interests” (sports, food, and so on), or you can go beyond that and create more refined (and specific) collections, like “Gluten Free Living”, for example. Openspace offers a “Community” section, too, where anyone can create a collection for other people to browse.  Of course, Reich tells me that creating collections is naturally a process that much of the app-consuming public may be resistant to doing, because it takes time. That’s why Openspace has added a “follow” button, which allows users to follow certain categories that they like, and when new apps are published to the category (Openspace crawls app stores every day), they get an email. Users also receive emails on sales, deals, and so on. It’s with this community feel in mind that Openspace decided to portion off 300 square feet of their Boulder offices to create its real life, brick and mortar app store, complete with “App Guru” staffers (a la Mac Geniuses) that can make recommendations of the best apps in certain categories and help people find the best fitness app, for example. Reich tells me that their Boulder store has already seen quite a bit of foot traffic this week. When I expressed a bit of surprise, the Openspace Co-founder reminded me that the average American is now carrying around a mobile supercomputer that, while appropriately “user friendly”, still causes a lot of anxiety. It’s a bit like FoMo — here you have this powerful tool with tons of different capabilities, but a lot of people are anxiety-ridden when it comes to getting the most out of their device. And apps are the main culprit. The co-founder said that they’ve been seeing moms, dads, and even grandmas, who are coming into the store saying that they’re looking for the best calendar apps — iCal is no longer cutting it — so can you help me find the best one? The average smartphone and app user (especially in the older demographic) relishes the opportunity to have these kind of educational conversations one-on-one, rather than in a one-way dynamic like you might find on Google or reading a blog post.  That being said, a lot of users and visitors to the Boulder store have been questioning Openspace, are they being paid to recommend certain apps? Reich assures me that this is far from the truth; App Gurus and Openspace at large will be recommending apps that the community finds most relevant, that they themselves use. That’s why they think categories can be so great for developers, as an Openspace iPad user can view 12 app collections at once, with 50 apps in each collection. There’s a much greater chance for visibility there than there is on a traditional app store. While the startup hasn’t secured it’s revenue models yet (though it has raised $1 million to date from The Foundry Group, David Cohen of TechStars, among other angels), Reich says that they’ve already been getting a lot of interest from app developers. Why? Because to get the most of some apps, the ideal scenario would allow developers to work directly with their users to coach them on how to get the most out of their apps. This obviously isn’t necessary for casual games, but for apps with deeper, more complex functionality, it’s nearly impossible to get this kind of face-to-face access to individual users. The more you dive into Openspace’s approach, the more you come to realize that they are onto — if nothing else — an idea worthy of testing. Real, live app stores may prove to have little use in today’s culture, but Reich is a smart guy, and my sense is that they just may be onto something here. I’ll leave it at that, but Openspace is definitely worth checking out. And, if you happen to be in Boulder, drop by and then pop in here to tell us about your experience.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s a tender situation, being a startup, isn’t it? Here you have what you think is a great product, maybe it’s even a little disruptive, but you’re not naive enough to think that you’re the only one who’s ever thought of this idea/product. At any moment, some giant or more well-funded startup could make your idea/widget/feature/tool/product their priority and with a little marketing spend, you’d be toast. Bootstrapping, you rely on your users’ feedback to tell you what works and what doesn’t, iterate, and hope that your user base grows organically until you have a sustainable business. That’s the hope, right? The same goes for Max Yoder, a 23-year-old designer from Indiana — except that in Yoder’s case, he launched his startup out of his bedroom in Indianapolis. Yoder recently graduated from college, at which point he went to work at Compendium to learn about startups, media software, and to help pay off his student loans. To help his cause, he was selected as an Orr Entrepreneurship Fellow last year, and has, over the last seven months, been building his startup. Recently, Yoder took off to work on Quipol full-time. Quipol (pronounced “kwi-poll”) is a web app and embeddable widget in beta, designed using HTML5, CSS3, Ruby on Rails, and Responsive Design, to let content producers create simple, one-question polls that can be embedded in blog posts and web pages to encourage feedback from their audiences and help them reach more readers. It’s part polling system, part commenting tool, but the fact of the matter is that there’s plenty of competition — and this has been done before. There are awesome sites like GoPollGo (full disclosure: Founder Ben Schaechter used to be a developer at TechCrunch and is a friend), which let users create realtime polls with plenty of Twitter integration. There’s Poll Authority, Poll Everywhere, Precision Polling (scooped up by Survey Monkey), and CMSes like WordPress have their own polling functionality, thanks to startups like PollDaddy. And that’s where Quipol’s real competition comes in: The already-in-place polling widgets owned or offered by content management platforms. But Yoder thinks that Quipol can be a good complement to some of these, as well as to commenting platforms like Disqus and Livefyre. So, Yoder is hoping that both through the simplicity of Quipol’s design (it looks great) and its “universality”, the service can offer some differentiation from others already occupying the space. At this point, the Quipol embed code works with WordPress.org, Tumblr, Squarespace, and Blogger, and everything but the social commenting works well in Posterous and Facebook. What does that mean? Users can vote and comment as they normally would on Facebook and Posterous, but if they choose to share their comment to their social network, the social post will link back to the poll on Quipol.com — not its embedded source. Unfortunately, in this case, Posterous and Facebook don’t play nicely with Quipol’s javascript, but Yoder says he’s currently plugging away at some workarounds. Interestingly, Quipol currently is without customization options, it only comes in 400 by 600 form, another thing Yoder is currently wrestling with — this is where that user feedback comes in. But, Quipol still does what it does well enough that it’s a great tool. The commenting uses Twitter and Facebook authentication to keep out the spam, and the linking in Facebook and Twitter offer a simple “thumbs up” or “thumbs down” voting mechanism, with the ability to comment if your opinion doesn’t fall into one of those two buckets.  Votes and comments can then be monitored by Quipol creators from the site’s admin layer. Readers, however, can’t see the results of the Quipol unless they vote, and the admin layer provides the essential analytics, until users provide enough data on what they want to see, which will enable Yoder to scale the analytics offerings. He also soon plans to add YouTube/Vimeo video embedding in the media portion of Quipols in the near future, which will look like this, for example. It’s a really simple tool, and Yoder has designed a great product — the question is whether or not there’s a real business here, or whether it’s best suited as a feature for a larger entity. Quipols work best when they are embedded into contextually relevant blog posts to help bloggers engage with and grow their audiences (the growth part happens via Quipol’s social commenting functionality, Yoder says).  And what better way to test it out than in a blog post? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Do you hate your Facebook friends? Do you want to blow them all up in fiery blasts of laser light? Sure, we all do. FaceInvaders allows you to shoot down your social graph. The game is a simple Space Invaders clone with a twist – each alien is a face randomly selected from your Facebook account. You shoot down friends hither and yon, allowing you to passive-aggressively destroy the people who you pretend to love. Once you’ve beaten all of the waves, you fight off the boss friend (also chosen at random). Interaction with the Facebook API allows you to post high scores on your wall. Built by start-up Appek, the game costs $1.99 and is available now. While it’s nothing new, it’s definitely clever and it might be a nice way to see how your friends have update their profile pictures. It also allows you to destroy them in secret, finding sweet release in the blaze of energy emitted as they explode into space. In some ways, it’s better than a relationship status update. Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Despite its struggles of late, Netflix is still one of the most popular sources when it comes to online streaming of movies and TV shows. (Although things may change if it’s acquired by Verizon.) For many of us, the Netflix queue is our go-to source for bookmarking films that we’d like to watch at a later date.  One new startup, called Plexus Entertainment, wants to take the Netflix formula and apply it to a broader scale. In the big picture, Plexus’ goal is to connect films and filmmakers with their audiences, so to do that, they’ve launched “Watch It” in public beta to allow users to keep track of movies they’re interested in, where those movies are playing, and to be proactively notified of all the different ways to view those films. Huzzah! Essentially, it’s a Netflix queue for movies on the Web — for both major studios and indie productions — as Watch It allows users by way of a simple search to find the quickest way to watch their favorite movies, whether they be in theaters, on DVD, Blu-ray, online, or on demand.   Of course, to build this sort of universal bookmarking system for digital content, Watch It is pushing beyond simply being a standalone site, as it is today launching “Watch It” buttons across film sites, including video portals, the websites of filmmakers and film studios, social media pages, fan sites, and industry trade publications, like Variety, as you can see below. (The button is also live on Tribecafilm.com and currently being installed on indiewire.com, filmmakermagazine.com, and more).  From theaters to streaming movies on demand from Amazon Instant Video, VUDU, and iTunes, the Watch It button enables users to create and maintain personalized queues of movies they want to see, with a range of tools for sorting and filtering those movies that they’ve queued. Watch It is also leveraging social networking by allowing users to share their movie choices with friends via Facebook Connect. While there are umpteen different buttons spread across the Web that allow sharing and self-expression around digital content, Plexus Founder and CEO David Larkin sees Watch It as a first for the movie industry. From the business side, Larkin sees the Watch It button as a potentially valuable direct marketing tool, as Watch It users will be able to receive alerts when movies they are interested in become available on their selected services.  Plexus will also be able to mine and aggregate (non-personally identifiable) consumer data to provide some valuable analytics for movie marketers and promoters. Having worked in the film industry as both a producer and director (he produced “Made In China”, which won the Audience Award at SXSW), Larkin says that the industry remains a fragmented beast, and filmmakers still have no real way of finding out whether their films are reaching their intended audiences — especially for indie producers and filmmakers. So, for media partners, Larkin thinks that an easily install-able and embeddable button can be a great tool for reader engagement, as well as a source of commerce, whereas for the film industry itself, Watch It could become a unique CRM-like platform.   Traditionally, when reading an online movie review, for example, there’s been no easy way to create action based on that interest, so embedding a Watch It button in a movie review, on blogs or other related content sites, allows readers to click and view all the available options, across digital platforms — or to go buy tickets to see the movie in theaters. Of course, the likelihood is that you won’t be able to watch the whole movie right then and there, which is where the Watch It queue comes in, allowing you to watch a trailer, but save full viewing for later in “wish lists”. The site will then send you email notifications when a movie has transitioned from theaters to Netflix or On-demand, as the app is updated throughout the movie’s release cycle. In terms of future applications, as one might imagine, Larkin sees potential for the Watch It model in music, TV, books, video games, and beyond. Larkin said that some film industry execs have expressed anxiety over the Watch It formula potentially cannibalizing ticket sales — something that scares the bajeebus out of a stodgy industry. But the CEO is convinced that his model will put Watch It in “the catbird seat” to watch as legacy cash flows transition to a home theater experience, where channels like Blu-ray players have higher profit margins. Inevitably, he says, although the theatrical movie channel will remain important for a long time to come, the industry is going to move fully into an IP-delivered framework, which certainly sounds like something you’d hear from Reed Hastings. The truth is, when you hear about an indie film at, say, a film festival, there’s a lot of initial buzz created around the movie. Of course, it may then take months for the film to reach theaters, and in the meantime, it loses the attention of most of its audience. Filmmakers have to start, then, from scratch when marketing their film, and it if its operating on an indie budget, there’s likely not much allocated for marketing spend. Whether or not “Watch It” wins the day is not important, but certainly services that offer consumers better ways to stay up to date on a film’s release cycle and give them one-click tools by which to queue and stream their favorite content is a no-brainer.  Check it out and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Scrappy  job candidate scoring database Identified will stop at nothing to become a contender in the professional network space. This morning it delivered a flaming uppercut to reigning champion LinkedIn, hiring away key product manager Janet Ryu. She built LinkedIn’s People You May Know and Who’s Viewed Your Profile features, and previously studied engineering at MIT. Ryu will work on similar features for Identified. Seeking reduced bureaucracy, a chance to build something from scratch, and stock liquidity, Ryu and others are leaving top tech companies to join smaller startups. Unlike the recent exodus from Twitter, Ryu’s says her move wasn’t primarily fueled by a desire to sell shares, though LinkedIn went public 7 months ago and its stock lockup has expired. “The IPO was definitely an awesome thing, but I don’t think it made me feel like I wanted look for someone else. Being at an early stage startup and being able to have a huge impact were huge motivators.” Ryu will become Head of Product and bring expertise to help make Identified more sticky. The upstart professional network is already growing quickly thanks to job candidates eager to check their Identified score — a sort of Klout for job candidates which indicates how in-demand they are to recruiters. It doubled its user base in the last 14 days, though Identified’s total user count is still small having only launched in September. Co-founder Brendan Wallace tells me “We didn’t expect to grow this quick, and ran into some problems with scaling.” To shore up the backend, Identified also recently hired its CTO Vladimir Giverts from Tagged and some engineers from Facebook. All these hires have been paid for with its $5.5 million in seed funding from investors including Google Chairman Eric Schmidt, Bill and Tim Draper, and former Facebook VP Chamath Palihapitiya.   Though it’s trying to knock out LinkedIn, Identified will also settle for an alliance. Wallace tells me “There’s an opportunity to work with LinkedIn to integrate our scores.” That’s a bit bold for such as small company, though. LinkedIn could take the Ryu hire as an act of war and look to squash Identified by launching its own scoring system.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google is acquiring the Silicon Valley-based startup Clever Sense, both companies are announcing today. Clever Sense, as you may recall, is the maker of the mobile application “Alfred,” which delivers personalized recommendations for nearby restaurants, coffee shops, bars and nightclubs using a combination of artificial intelligence and machine-learning algorithms. Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but the Clever Sense team will be joining Google’s local services division immediately, the home to the business directory and reviews service Google Places. According to Clever Sense CEO Babak Pahlavan, the company is beyond happy to be joining Google. “Happy doesn’t quite cut it,” he says. “This is an incredible opportunity for us and the team, and it’s amazing the way it’s happening.” Which may actually mean: fast. Only last week, the company was said to have been in talks with Groupon, although, not surprisingly, Pahlavan can’t comment on that report. He will say, however, that Google was simply a good fit for his company’s core vision. “Ultimately,” he says, “it was a question of how can we take this to a whole new level?” At Google, he says, the people there believe in the same vision. “They’ll allow us to work on this, but just make it bigger. Google is totally on the same page – it’s kind of scary how much,” he added. So what was Clever Sense’s vision, then? Restaurants and other local venues (bars, clubs, etc.) were just the start. The company was also talking about using its technology to move into making deal recommendations next, like those from daily deal outlets such as Groupon and Living Social. But further down the road, the company saw itself as being able to recommend other things, like local activities, entertainment, and more. (A tie-in with Google Schemer, perhaps? Google won’t say.) This idea of personalized recommendations speaks to Google’s vision of a “serendipity engine” something which Google’s Marissa Mayer has talked about in the past. She referred to Google’s vision of being able to surface “serendipitous” suggestions on mobile phones based on where you are. This year, she suggested that such a technology may emerge sometime within “a two-year horizon.” With Clever Sense, however, that window may be narrowed. And ideally, Clever Sense, too, will be able to continue along its same path with access to more resources and Google’s scale. Although Google has a history of acquiring technology companies then shutting down their existing products (see: Jaiku, Slide, Aardvark, etc.), a Google spokesperson says that the plan is to leave the Alfred app up-and-running for the “foreseeable future.” We can only hope. The official statement to be published to the Clever Sense website reads: When we embarked on our mission to curate the world around us, we knew we were taking on a huge challenge. We worked hard to build the Clever Sense Platform to tackle the problem of information overload in the real world. Using that platform, we built Alfred to create a simple, enjoyable and powerful way to discover new places and help make decisions on the go. It’s exciting to see that our passion turned into something people around the world use regularly to make everyday decisions that are just right for them. Today, we are excited to join Google and start a new chapter in curating the world around us! Together with the Google team, we will accelerate our efforts toward this shared vision. Google helps local businesses connect with potential customers, and its worldwide presence can bring the value of Clever Sense to a much larger audience. Discovering local information is extremely important to both users and businesses, and the acquisition of Clever Sense will benefit both. The journey has been nothing short of incredible. Our vision has only become bigger, and our commitment stronger. With Google and Clever Sense working together, our entire team looks forward to building more intelligent, serendipitous and magical services! We didn’t achieve this success alone. We sincerely want to thank our users, investors, our amazing board and superb advisors. We will be your loyal fans for life. Smiles, Babak PahlavanCo-founder and CEO Meanwhile, Google’s statement reads: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in August, social game developer Kixeye raised $18 million in series C financing, and added Zynga Andrew Trader to its Board of Directors. And today the self-proclaimed “largest maker of online strategy combat games” has announced the addition of another ex-Zynga exec into the fold.  Brandon Barber will be joining Kixeye as the SVP of Marketing, where he will report directly to Chairman and CEO Will Harbin. Barber brings significant gaming experience to Kixeye, as he previously co-founded online sports game developer Lionside, which was acquired by ngmoco (qua DeNA) in June of this year. Behind Barber (who was also VP of Marketing and Production), Lionside brought sports games to Facebook, and created titles like NBA Legend and Lionside Football. Before founding Lionside, Barber was the first VP of Marketing at Zynga, establishing the company’s initial communication, brand, and product marketing strategies. Zynga created that role specifically for him and, considering that he reported directly to Andrew Trader, it seems that the former Zynga duo is linked up again. Prior to Zynga, Barber served as the Director of Global Marketing at EA, where he was “responsible for the concept, design, deployment and profitability of EA’s web services based business model”, among other things.  Kixeye has had a great year, picking up a few key staffers, as well as becoming profitable and cash-flow positive. Look for more big moves in 2012. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Party Earth, a media company that provides reviews, up-to-date calendars and user-generated photos of social venues (i.e. bars, nightclubs, beaches, casinos and whatnot) in a variety of cities throughout the USA and Europe, has secured $4 million in funding from undisclosed investors. “Party Earth is the best destination online to discover how to have the most fun offline – no matter where, when, or with whom,” claims president and CEO Sam Altman.  The website currently offers tens of thousands of local reviews, photos, events, and videos across 19 cities around the world, from London to Amsterdam, Venice, Barcelona and Munich, as well as major cities in the U.S. like New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco. Party Earth users can discover places to visit and parties based on their personality, current mood, or who they are going out with. This approach allows the company to deliver hyper-targeted member-exclusive offers, product specials, event and venue recommendations, and more.  With this new funding, Party Earth aims to enhance the site by adding social features for users to interact, check in at venues, share their experiences, create their own social calendars, upload photos and video, and more.  Additionally, the company says it is planning a new mobile platform that will “marry geo-location services with its content”, whatever that may mean.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mindjet, a developer of mind mapping, work management and collaboration software, has launched a free Android app. What isn’t mentioned in the blog post announcing the new app, is that it wasn’t actually made by Mindjet. Rather, they’ve acquired the small company behind the Thinking Space app to make their way onto the Android Market more rapidly and build upon an existing user base.  A couple of months ago, Mindjet’s Chief Product Officer, Blaine Mathieu, wrote a blog post on the company’s mobile strategy, highlighting their support for the iOS platform. To date, there have been roughy 325,000 downloads of Mindjet’s iPhone and iPad apps. Thinking Space has actually seen more success with its Android app, clocking more than 1.1 million downloads.  Mindjet for Android is essentially a pocket productivity tool that helps users capture ideas, create business plans and organize thinking in order to boost productivity. Update: Financial terms of the acquisition of Thinking Space were not disclosed, but the company did offer a statement on when the deal was forged: The acquisition of Thinking Space, the leading information mapping solution for Android, was finalized in late summer for an undisclosed price. Key members of the Thinking Space team have joined Mindjet and will lead the continuing development efforts as we integrate it into the Mindjet platform. Also read: Mindjet Buys Cohuman, To Debut Cloud-Based Collaboration Tool Mindjet Connect Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBilly Chasen on Music RightsIn episode I of Chris Dixon’s Founder Stories interview with Turntable.fm’s, Billy Chasen, Chasen said most of his investors backed Turntable’s transition from Stickybits to Turntable, with the exception being an investor who simply wasn’t a fan of the music space. In this episode, Dixon says a lack of understanding – or lack of enthusiasm for music startups has been a common theme in the VC community, but thinks the mindset might be changing thanks to companies like Spotify and Pandora. Chasen agrees – and takes a bit of mystery out of how Turntable navigates music rights before fielding questions about Turntable’s plan to monetize. In a nutshell, Chasen says securing music rights is “becoming easier and easier” and as long as Turntable operates as “digital radio in the US” the rules they have to follow are pretty defined. He notes, if we were “to go international then [we’d] have to start talking to quite a few more of the rights holders.” As for growing the company, Chasen tells Dixon he is a fan of an organic approach and says any plans to generate revenue would have to “make the experience better.” Options could include “virtual goods” or anything else that adds “to the experience” but at this stage, solidifying a business model is not the primary focus. He tells Dixon, “the top priority right now is to nail product and fix anything that is not working.” Make sure to watch the entire video for additional insights and be sure to check out episode I of this interview here. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring leaders including Mayor Bloomberg & Fred Wilson are here. Episode III of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Topsy Labs is releasing a social, realtime search engine for mobile devices today, enabling users to discover relevant chatter about any topic based on data from Twitter and Google+.  The search engine comes with a nifty “Social Time Machine” feature that enables users to look up results on a timeline that can be controlled with a slider (see screenshots below). Also useful: search queries can be automatically saved so users can revisit specific results at any time, and any piece of social content can be referenced historically for any topic, term or link. Topsy cites a Performics study that says 32 percent of people search more on mobile phones than they do on computers, and that 75 percent of people think that mobile search makes their life easier. Headquartered in San Francisco and founded in 2006, Topsy is backed by BlueRun Ventures, Ignition Partners, Founders Fund and Scott Banister. Also read: Topsy Launches Realtime Search Engine For Public Google+ Posts  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Does the world need another social news site? That’s the big question about today’s launch of Comunitee, a new beta destination for tracking the news you want to follow, commenting and sharing stories with your friends. I mean, it’s not like we already have Facebook, Twitter and Google+ for this, right? Well, not exactly. For those who want the full, real-time firehose of feeds for a set of specific topics, there are fewer options on the desktop that don’t involve geeky RSS readers. And given what Google did to Google Reader, a lot of people are still looking for online alternatives. To be clear, Comunitee is not an RSS reader. It’s a news aggregator. The service tracks several thousand sources across ten major categories, like U.S., World, Politics, Tech, Sports, Health, etc. You can also set up a particular keyword or phrase as a category. (So for example, you could track all the mentions of “Nexus Prime.”) Comunitee has a lot of competition. On mobile, it comes from apps like Flipboard, Pulse, Zite, Flud, Riversip, and dozens of others. On the desktop, there are other social news sites, social networks, RSS readers, personal homepages and more. What will make Comunitee stand out? For starters, the news site is smarter than your average RSS reader. That is, it gets smarter the more you use it. Using machine learning, the site tracks your reading patterns in order to surface content more closely matched to your interests as indicated by your reading behavior. That alone could make the service an interesting alternative to a pure RSS solution. How well these algorithms work over an extended period of time, I can’t say. The site is only now launching into beta, and there has been limited time to test. One thing I did notice, however, was that the site was not as real-time or comprehensive as it should be. The company tells me that the newsfeeds refresh every 60 seconds, but there have been some kinks during the early private beta. (Last week, every article you saw was not older than 2 minutes, I’m told. Today, that’s not the case, but I’m willing to give them the benefit of the doubt.) Assuming the team can squash that particular bug, then they also need to address the service’s comprehensiveness. For example, using the above-mentioned query “Nexus Prime,” Comunitee can’t find a thing. That’s a shame because the site itself looks good. It’s easy to set up and navigate. You can see the top news trends on the right, along with info about what your friends are reading (both top stories and a real-time feed), and you can comment directly within Comunitee itself. The site will direct you to the actual news outlet for reading, though, so it’s not entirely publisher-unfriendly. Comunitee is backed by $170K in angel funding, and is led by serial entrepreneur Dan Daszkowski, who founded BusinessMart, Inc., which was acquired by Internet Brands, Inc. (formerly CarsDirect) in 2009 and Daszign, which was acquired by CoutureCandy, Inc. in 2006. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Family safety startup Life360, which makes a freemium mobile security app by the same name, is today announcing it has secured $3.5 million in Series A funding. The round included investment from Fontinalis Partners, Kapor Capital, 500 Startups, Bessemer Venture Partners, Venture51, Bullpen Capital, Social Leverage and Eghosa Omoigui’s EchoVC Partners, as well as existing investors LaunchCapital, Seraph Group and Mark Goines. The latest investment brings the company’s total funding to $5 million. The company says it will use the new funding to move into other verticals, including cars and homes. For those unfamiliar with Life360, the app provides a number of features targeted towards families, including family locator services, private “check-ins,” alerts, neighborhood safety notices, identify protection, and more. Some of the features are available for free, while others are available for the app’s premium subscribers. The move to freemium caused a big uptick in growth, as Jason Kincaid reported back in January. At the time, the company was nearing 1 million families. Now it has 6 million families (10 million users). With the additional investment, the company says it’s expanding its focus beyond mobile, with plans to automatically link vehicles and homes to the service, without requiring additional hardware. This would allow users to enable vehicle tracking and home monitoring features which would be accessible via their mobile phone. Currently, Life360 is available on the Android and iPhone platforms, but is listed as “coming soon” to both Windows Phone and BlackBerry. You can grab a copy for yourself from here. Correction: The signups number from before was referring to families, not users. This has been corrected. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in July, TechCrunch Disrupt winner, Soluto, raised $10.2 million in a series B financing led by Index Ventures. The new round of investment brought the Israeli startup’s total funding to $18 million, which it’s raised over the last two years from a list of investors that include Bessemer Venture Partners, Giza Venture Capital, and Proxima Ventures, as well as angels like Chris Dixon, Yuval Neeman, Saar Gillai and Nadav Zohar. Why all this financial excitement over the young startup? Put simply, the Soluto’s value proposition has been its simple application that, once downloaded, allows the millions of PC users across the globe to quickly run diagnostics on their hard drives to locate all things wonky. Soluto’s software helps PC users find and identify printing problems, buggy add-ons, resource hogs, and so on, suggesting fixes for all those things that affect a computer’s speed and performance over the course of time.  Since debuting at Disrupt, Soluto has racked up about 3 million downloads, all without any significant marketing or advertising efforts — most of those users have been acquired by word of mouth. And though Soluto would probably continue to thrive based on its venture backing and the value proposition of an app for PCs that dives into the Windows core and leverages collective wisdom to help mitigate PC frustrations, Soluto has decided to change directions. Starting today, Soluto is embarking on a new phase, and over the next year, will begin to look quite a bit different than it did when it launched last year. So why has the startup decided to — dare I say — pivot? Well, for starters, the Soluto download will continue to be available for a few months, so users don’t need to lose their lunch quite yet; but, over time, the startup will be transitioning users over to its new browser-based look. The reason for this, according to CPO Roee Adler is that, based on user feedback and behavior, it’s become clear to the team that Soluto-ers are using the app mainly to support other people — whether at work or at home — (young) people have become what he calls “family CTOs”, helping parents, neighbors, and the less-technically-inclined with their computer frustrations. The real issue for Soluto, Adler says, is how to more effectively help these “Mac Geniuses” of the world manage and fix the performance and speed issues of their luddite loved ones. And the Apple comparison is an apt one considering the startup’s future plans: While Soluto has been an exclusively PC product, the company plans to launch a Mac (and mobile) client in the near future.  In other words, Soluto’s new look builds on technology it already has in place, including its “low-level” agent and backend PC Genome servers — except that now these technologies will be wrapped in a webby user experience.  Still confused? Simply put, the new Soluto is built to assist the more tech savvy in helping the not-so-savvy optimize and fix their PCs. In the same way the startup has enabled users to identify problems and deal with frustrations inherent to the PC experience, the new build essentially allows people to remotely access their friends’ computers to quickly weed out slow, memory-eating applications, update their antivirus software and mobile apps, and so on. In Soluto’s user dashboard, family CTOs will be able to view a full suite of easy-to-navigate information about PC frustrations, like non-responsive apps, and will be able to (with a few clicks) install a new browser or change the user’s default one, remove toolbars, eliminate app update reminders by pushing silent upgrades, track fan speed, temperature, and battery wear — or even easily install desktop apps like Skype, Dropbox, etc. — essentially all the things that your mom asks you to do over the phone or during your trip home for the holidays. Again, all of these improvements to the user experience can be accomplished remotely thanks to Soluto’s existing agent (which means that you can make tweaks whether the user’s computer is on or off), and, of course, access has to be approved by the person who owns the computer you’ll be accessing. Your loved ones can give you permission by email, for example. Another bonus: It’s all free. Which brings us to how Soluto plans to make money under its new model. Although this is just phase one of the process, in the future IT professionals, or those who use Soluto at work (or at an enterprise level) will have to pay to use it. For average, every day consumers, who are just using Soluto to help a small number of “favorite people”, it will remain free. The new version of Soluto today launches in closed beta and will be evolving over the next few months based on feedback from the startup’s power users, specifically in relation to problems and scenarios they encounter most frequently when helping others.  For readers interested in testing out the beta product, Soluto is offering 50 free invites. All you have to do is head over to the landing page here and enter the code “techcrunchsentme”.  Right now, it’s just a web-based agent for PC users, but Mac and mobile agents are on the way. Check it out, and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInTweetVid Wesbite DemoUp until now, Twitvid has been the largest repository of videos on Twitter other than YouTube. It’s essentially been the TwitPic of video, and it’s done a good job with 40 million video views per month and 12 million unique visitors. But people mostly come to Twitvid from social links, they don’t stick around.  CEO Mo Al Adham wants to change that by turning Twitvid into a social network for sharing videos. He came by my office to show me a preview of the new site, which launches today (watch the video). Twitvid is now redesigned as a feed of videos from Twitvid, YouTube, and Vimeo which you can organize into channels, repost, or share across Facebook and Twitter. You can follow channels or other members and the videos from those sources start to appear in your video feed.  Channels can be public or private, and your friends can add videos to the same channels as you do if you allow them. There is also a lean-back mode fro watching videos full-screen.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Getaround, the peer-to-peer car sharing company that won this year’s TechCrunch Disrupt NYC startup competition, this morning announced that it is poised to make its debut in the greater Portland metropolitan area by February of 2012, following an initial launch at Portland State University on the 1st of January. To facilitate the launch, Getaround was selected by the Federal Highway Administration to participate in a joint initiative with the city. The collaboration includes a grant of $1,725,000 in federal funding. According to the press release, the Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) grant in Portland marks the first federal grant ever awarded for peer-to-peer car sharing.  Starting today, Portland commuters and car owners can begin signing up for the ‘Airbnb for cars’ (oh yeah) on the Getaround website. In addition, Getaround says it will collaborate with the Oregon Transportation Research and Education Consortium to research the dynamics and impacts of p2p car sharing. Currently, Getaround is available in San Francisco and the surrounding Bay Area, including Mountain View, Palo Alto and Berkeley, as well as limited areas within San Diego. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes, reporting startup news can make a person feel old. Case in point: Woozworld, the virtual world maker for tweens, is launching a social networking service called WoozIn, which I’m saying with a straight face. I swear. WoozIn. It’s essentially a Facebook-lite/virtual world mashup that allows prepubescent youth to share, comment and like their friends’ updates, pictures, videos and more, while also meeting the protections dictated by the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA). Yeah, WoozIn. Add me on WoozIn. Friend me on WoozIn. I’ll WoozIn…oh dear. Let’s not use it as a verb, shall we? Silly names aside, the virtual world maker is notable for the fact that it raised $6 million this summer from Telesystem and iNovia Capital along with unnamed angel investors, and also has Bernard Gershon, former general manager and senior vice president of Disney, sitting on the startup’s board. It’s seeing fairly good traction too. Woozworld now has over 15 million unique visitors per month from over 180 countries. The users have created over 8 million avatars and 16 million virtual spaces, and play for an average of 50 minutes per day. (Take that, Facebook).  “Uniques” is not the same as registered users, however, but the user count is now at 8.5 million+. And the number of users has tripled in the last 10 months. So as the kids say, Woozworld is blowin’ up. (Wait, do kids still say that?) With the addition of the new social networking aspect to the service dubbed “WoozIn,” tweens and young teens (ages 9-14) can now create a virtual identity that allows them to connect with others while also showing off their achievements and virtual spaces. (For those unfamiliar with Woozworld, users build businesses or set up restaurants, hotels and games as they choose). “Basically, we are melding a virtual world and social network – it’s like Facebook meets Second Life,” explains Woozworld CEO Eric Brassard. Users don’t post actual photos, though – just pictures of their avatar and the things they’ve built. But they get to test the social networking waters through posts to their “WallZ” and messages from their “FriendZ” about the hot “TopicZ” of the day. These hot TopicZ are selected by the company itself, to keep things tween-friendly. With parental permission, however, users can post YouTube videos to their walls, which could provide a loophole for more personal sharing. The COPPA compliance, common to sites targeting children, like Club Penguin, Neopets, Webkinz, etc., is nothing unexpected, but it’s worth noting. Previously in beta, the new social networking service officially rolls out on Tuesday here on www.woozworld.com.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Apple is reportedly going to use part of its enormous pile of cash to buy an Israeli fabless semiconductor company that specializes in flash storage solutions. Calcalist reports – in Hebrew – that the world’s most valuable company is in talks to buy Herzliya Pituach, Israel-based Anobit for $400 million to $500 million. If the report checks out, this would mark Apple’s first acquisition in Israel (and the first with Tim Cook at the helm as CEO), and also a rare occasion because the consumer electronics giant doesn’t usually buy non-software companies. The only hardware companies Apple is known to have acquired in the past two decades were Steve Jobs-founded NeXT, Raycer Graphics, Intrinsity and P.A. Semi. Anobit provides flash storage solutions for enterprise and mobile markets, based on its proprietary MSP (which stands for ‘Memory Signal Processing’) technology. Its solutions are designed to improve the speed, endurance and performance of flash storage systems while driving down the cost. Anobit’s technology is comprised of signal processing algorithms that compensate for physical limitations of NAND flash, the company claims. Anobit does not publish a list of customers or references, but says its clients are among the world’s leading flash manufacturers, consumer electronics vendors and storage system providers. According to Calcalist reporter Assaf Gilad, Apple relies on the company’s solutions for the iPhone, iPad and MacBook Air product lines, among other devices. South Korean Hynix is said to use Anobit’s solution for a flash memory chip you can find inside the iPhone 4S. Anobit says it has 21 granted patents (and 95 in total). The company has raised $76 million from Battery Ventures, Pitango Venture Capital and strategic investors, including Intel Capital. Apple is likely interested in Anobit for its MSP-powered MSP20xx embedded flash controllers for smartphones and tablet computers, which can significantly boost memory performance. Last August, Anobit announced that it had shipped a remarkable 20 million of said flash controllers. Anobit was founded in 2006 and is led by co-founder, chairman and CEO Prof. Ehud Weinstein. Prior to co-founding Anobit, Prof. Weinstein was a co-founder and CEO of Libit Signal Processing, which was acquired by Texas Instruments in 1999. Anobit co-founder and president Ariel Maislos was previously co-founder of Passave, which was acquired by PMC Sierra in 2006. The rest of the Israeli company’s management team members also have impressive resumes, which is certainly another argument in favor of an Apple acquisition. Calcalist reports that Anobit employs roughly 200 people today. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You may not have heard of it, but San Diego has its very own tech incubator, called EvoNexus, a product of the non-profit industry association, CommNexus which provides startups with access to capital, talent and business development. One of the companies we wrote about recently, Fashioning Change, has just been accepted into the incubator. And, today, another one of EvoNexus’ startups is officially announcing itself to the world with a platform relaunch, new iOS apps, and a bit of funding to boot. Joining Taap.it (formerly Social Listing) and a host of others, Antengo is launching a redesigned mobile marketplace for posting and discovering realtime, local classifieds. (Check out the free iPhone app here.)  While this may not initially set your hair on fire, classified listings a la Craigslist are resources we turn to virtually every day, to find tickets to local events, sell an unused gadget, or find freelance work. So, simply put, Antengo wants to make it really easy for you to do just that on your mobile device, allowing you and your local communities to post, browse, and answer listings in realtime.  How does it work? It’s pretty simple. Once you’ve downloaded the free app, new users will hit the splash page, where they can browse listings immediately without logging in, using simple keyword searches. Antengo then populates the splash page with realtime results. For users who want to post a listing, Antengo requires you to sign up (Facebook and Twitter authentication are available), at which point you can browse through categories, find the appropriate one, take a picture of your item, enter cost, your address (or use “send my location” functionality), and post — listings take only a few short minutes to create and are immediately posted to the marketplace. Both buyers and sellers can apply filters, search by categories, and message each other directly or make calls in-app, the former of which results in simple push notifications. Listings are searchable based on the time published, proximity to you (location), descriptions, or by photo — because, let’s be honest, you never buy something from a local listing without browsing through a few photos first.  Antengo is going after a pared-down design that makes buying, selling, and browsing classified listings simple and easy-to-use while you’re on the go. The design is focused around providing users with specific and immediate needs — selling last-minute concert tickets, a place to live, or someone to carpool with — an easy way to connect with local users looking for the same items or services.  According to comScore’s 2010 Mobile Year in Review report, classifieds are one of the fastest growing mobile categories, second only to social media. So, it’s clear that there is plenty of demand for a well-designed secondary market for mobile shopping. Obviously, Craigslist has a well-reviewed app for iOS as well, and with a well-established name, it’s an uphill battle for startups looking to compete toe-to-toe with the larger players, eBay included. However, while Craigslist has a few not-so-shabby third-party apps, its apps still mostly rely on web data, and they haven’t yet killed the mobile user experience. So, where Antengo hopes to offer differentiation with the bigs is through offering a platform model that can incorporate mobile classifieds into other offerings, including events. Antengo has been working with events producers to power ad hoc “live event marketplaces”, which provide attendees with a channel to find vendors selling food and merchandise at specific GPS locations, as well as public restrooms, parking, and special offers from the producers (like ticket give-aways, for example). Antengo can also create realtime mobile marketplace functionality at events in the P2P sense as well, providing attendees with the ability to broadcast requests and offers to others in the crowd, creating a level of interactivity and serving as a utility to help event-goers save money through carpooling, etc. Tech events are another likely candidate for this kind of mobile marketplace, as Antengo Co-founder and CEO Marcus Wandell tells us that they have a commitment from Seattle’s largest tech conference as well as conferences in San Diego. This is where Antengo eventually hopes to make its money — by capturing mobile payments at large events or grocery stores, where users might be able to pay using the app once it’s linked to their mobile bank accounts. For now, Antengo isn’t currently monetizing its marketplace, but they will eventually enable users to make purchases in-app.  Beyond Craigslist, Antengo also has to deal with at least nominal competition from apps like Zaarly, an awesome service that lets users hire people to do just about anything, whether it be to bring them a cup of coffee, or track down some quality Giants tickets, or find a private dancer for hire. Zaarly is a bit like the mobile Task Rabbit. Antengo has a bit of a different use case, and now it also has $415K in funding from institutional and angel investors, including a “a GM at MSNBC Interactive, a former M&A exec at Microsoft & Vodafone, and the CTO of ViaSat”, to name a few.  With a location-aware, GPS and realtime messaging with push-enabled app, Antengo is hoping to take on Craigslist and others in the mobile classifieds space. The app still has a ways to go, but the design looks great, and I have to say that posting an add is frictionless, nearly instantaneous, and thus pretty easy to do. At the very least, that right there puts Antengo off to a good start. What do you think? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in September, WellnessFX launched a platform that is designed to help people take charge of their health. And today, the startup is adding to its own financial health, announcing that it has raised $4 million in series B funding. The round was led by a new investor, Javelin Venture Partners, with participation from the startup’s existing investors, Floodgate and Voyager Capital. Alex Gurevich a Principal at Javelin Venture Partners will join the startup as a board observer, while Javelin Managing Director Jed Katz will join the board directly. The investors join a board which already includes Mike Maples of Floodgate and Voyager Capital Managing Director Curtis Feeney. (4-Hour Workweek author Tim Ferriss is also a strategic advisor.) WellnessFX joins GAIN Fitness as health-focused startups that have recently raised funding from some big name investors, showing that investor interest in robust digital healthcare solutions continues. For those unfamiliar, WellnessFX is designing a platform that offers users a preventative, diagnostic tool to manage their health, rather than a solution that only treats health problems as they arise. Just as GAIN gives its users access to professional personal trainers, Wellness FX’s platform offers consumers access to a community of expert practitioners to help them create (and navigate) personalized care and diagnoses. Once WellnessFX has helped you bring in your health data, it allows users to share this aggregated health data with a network of expert health practitioners.  That digital experience can then be augmented by online consultations that can be set up at the convenience of users — both in the evening and on weekends — through which users will receive a set of personalized recommendations and simple, actionable insights intended to help you stay health and reach your health goals. Basically, WellnessFX is trying to give you access to your own personal health team that will help see to your longevity and avoid waiting rooms and expensive treatments. To reach this goal, the startup wants its users to have access not only to diagnostics, but to nutritional research, genetic data, integrated therapies, as well as charts and graphs that allow them to track lab results, genetic proclivities, etc. — data that will help paint a more accurate, comprehensive picture of your current health. Currently, the platform is only available to Californians, but with its new funding in the bank, WellnessFX will be “aggressively expanding” into a number of other states in early January, including Oregon and Washington. WellnessFX ain’t cheap, though, starting at $650 a year for one “baseline assessment” (to help set your personalized goals), which includes 50 diagnostics and one consultation. The price scales from there. Of course, WellnessFX is hoping that this is a trivial price to put on preventing those larger, more expensive health problems down the road. For more, check out WellnessFX at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Whether you believe in psychic consultation or not, the industry pulls in $2 billion a year and is primed for disruption. Pay-per-minute phone calling still dominates the market despite being around for decades. Launching today, PsychicsLive.com is a new psychic consultation video chat site designed to give people a face-to-face connection with spiritual advisors. By taking a cut of the $2 to $6 a minute users pay to learn the future or just receive on-demand therapy, PsychicsLive.com could quickly turn profitable. Miss Cleo’s slogan “Call me now!” may soon give way to a generation of psychics asking you to Skype them. Psychic video chat has several advantages over voice calling for both users and PsychicsLive.com. Instead of blindly being matched with “psychics”, users can select who they think matches them. Questions are asked and answered live, but then users can replay their sessions later. The video aspect could also inspire feelings of confidence and intimacy for users, as they know their consultant is actually engaged with them and not doing something else. For PsychicsLive.com, the video model scales easily. It doesn’t have to pay for expensive phone systems, carrier charges, or call centers. Consultants simply sign up, use their own computers and webcams, and accept clients whenever they’re available. PsychicsLive.com vets the consultants, and operations manager Brad Estes tell me “We’ve kicked people off that didn’t meet our standards.” Industries typically thought of illegitimate can sometimes lag behind modern technology. Those willing to assess them objectively from a business stand point can find great opportunity behind a sketchy public perception or a model that seems crazy. Remember, most people wouldn’t have predicted virtual goods could become a $2.9 billion a year business.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fast Society today announced it will shut down its group messaging app and instead devote resources to its new app Cameo that will launch next month. Group messaging seemed like such a big opportunity a few years ago. But that was before Apple launched iMessage, Skype bought GroupMe, and Facebook converted Beluga into Messenger. Suddenly, there wasn’t much to add by being a mobile group texting app without OS or other platform integration. Fast Society will apply its existing team and investors towards offering unique value by helping people share moments rather than just messages. After 9am EST on Wednesday, December 14th, all Fast Company apps will cease to function and messages won’t be delivered. Users should save any photos or other content as it will all be deleted then as well. Don’t take this as a sign of defeat, though. Fast Society’s co-founder Matthew Rosenberg tells me “It seemed dumb to just quit. We’re not quitters, we’re New Yorkers. We’re used to hustling every single day. It’s unfortunate to have launched something into a crowded space, but the benefit is we saw a lot of people doing it one way and we’re passionate about doing it a different way.” One area where I see potential in mobile sharing is unifying all the different types of content people usually publish separately. I’d love an app that lets me accumulate multiple photos, videos, status updates, location, friend tags and more behind a single shared link, creating a sort of collage of a moment. This seems to match with Rosenberg and Fast Society’s mission with Cameo. “We’re trying to capture experience and be part of fun events. Group messaging became the lowest common denominator.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just 3 months after its public launch following 2 years of private beta, content discovery engine Thoora today announced that it will shut down. Thoora’s website, Android tablet app, WordPress plugin, and all user data will be blinked out of existence on December 15th. Its failure to get a working smartphone app out the door allowed services like Flipboard and sites like Techmeme to swoop in and solve the information overload problem more beautifully and efficiently. The shuttering should serve as a lesson to entrepreneurs: you can’t spend forever perfecting your product. Thoora allowed users to view the top content about selected topics aggregated from across the web. Users could also explore topics set up by the community such as “US Economy”, “Cybersecurity”, or “Wine”. The design was dry and unintuitive, though, and the content surfaced was often too old or not relevant enough. Thoora is only giving users 4 days to manually bookmarks their on-site favorites, and there are no tools to assist in exporting or converting user data. When Leena Rao talked to Thoora about why it took two years to publicly launch in September, it said the delay was caused by an “an explosion of social media and content since 2009 and Thoora was working on integrating this into the application.” Sure, aggregating Instagram, Tumblr, and other channels was important, but that should have been happening once the product was out the door. There’ll always be one more “essential” feature to add, but first and good beats last and great. Orphaned Thoora users won’t have to look far for a replacement, though. SkyGrid, NewsMix, Pulse, and many others are all tackling cross-vertical news aggregation.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Being a man in the modern world is no easy task. Should I friend her on Facebook? When is it alright to ignore a text message? Men’s advice site Brotips can help, and  Mark Cuban wants to make sure you’ve heard of it. He’s invested an undisclosed sum in the website, though it’s not $1 billion like Fast Company jokingly reports. Brotips makes it easy to share tweet-length knowledge like “someone telling you that you don’t need to wear a condom is the first sign that you should” and “always log out”. Built by Toronto-based Push Pull Labs, the site now has 1.5 million uniques a month and 2.5 million visits, and is monetizing through a sponsored “Brands Bros Luv” section and a soon to launch clothing line. Rather than bury advice in long articles or scatter it across Top 10 lists like online men’s magazines, Brotips tiles its home page with succinct ways for guys to improve their lives. This creates satisfyingly light-weight browsing experience that’s perfect for lazy bros, similar to how Where Is The Cool displays photos. A surprising 48% of the site’s traffic comes from women, as they share the tips in hopes of turning the man-boys they know into true gentlemen. The students and young professionals demographic is lucrative. The site attracts those looking for self improvement and who may be willing to spend to attain it. The punchy advice will fit perfectly on t-shirts so there’s solid potential for the forthcoming Brotips clothing line. To drive awareness, the 11-person Brotips team will be setting up a campus rep program. This isn’t a typical venture capital vehicle, as the chance of a big multiple payout seems slim. For Cuban, it could be more of a lifestyle investment, syncing with his ownership of the Dallas Mavericks and investment in Jungle Cents, a daily deals site for frat guys. Perhaps he sees Brotips as a way to remake the world in his maverick image.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Continuing today’s theme of awesome Android apps (how did that happen?), Skitch also has something to announce: it has reached 3 million downloads of Skitch for Android. Given its Android launch occurred just three and half months ago, the company says that’s equivalent of a new download every 1.5 seconds. Skitch has also added a new feature to its Android app – image rotation. Well, that’s awesome, too. Technically, the image rotation feature rolled out last week, but Skitch is making it publicly known today via blog post. This feature lets users rotate arrows, text and shapes by tapping the object, pressing with two fingers, then rotating. You can rotate multiple objects at once, by tapping them individually then doing the two-finger rotate. The Skitch Android application was launched at the Evernote Trunk Conference, when CEO Phil Libin announced the company had acquired the popular Mac app, and was bringing it to mobile. Surprisingly, the Mac app arrived on Android first, but the company says that an iOS version is “coming soon.” Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Lightbox, the beautifully designed social photo app for Android backed by $1.2 million in seed funding from Index, Accel, SV Angel, 500 Startups, and others, is today launching a revamped web interface that’s like a lazy man’s Tumblr. As with the hot blogging startup Tumblr, the idea with Lightbox’s new photo journal feature is to provide a stream of updates others can follow, share, like and comment on. For all its simplicity, Tumblr still involves the set up of a blog and mostly manual updates. Automatic posting of content requires additional configuration or the use of third-party tools. But with today’s Lightbox update, all users get their own Tumblr-esque photo blog, no extra effort required. Previously, Lightbox users were given a page for their public photos at a custom URL (format: your-username.lightbox.com), but the layout involved pages of thumbnails to click through. Today, that URL will now become a photo blog, where photos are automatically organized into albums for you. To accomplish this, Lightbox looks at the timestamp associated with the photos taken, enabling the service to group photos together appropriately. The end result is an automatically created photo blog with an attractive layout which ends up feeling very much like Tumblr. Here’s an example. And here’s another.  Users are given a “follow” button next to which their social stats display, including the number of photos posted, number of followers and the number of people they’re following in return. When you hover over one of the photos, you can quickly click a heart button to “like” it. You can view these favorites later on from your profile section. On an individual photo’s page, you can comment, tweet, share to Facebook or Google+. The entire post itself can be socially shared as well. Lightbox has been an interesting company to watch, given its focus on building for Android first. Despite the mobile platform’s large market share, it’s still rare to see companies choosing Android over iOS for their debut. But that’s where Lightbox’s creators, Thai Tran and Nilesh Patel, see a market opportunity. So far, the company seems to be proving there is a case for well-designed apps on Android (And it’s not the only one). Lightbox has now reached nearly 1 million downloads in less than six months. Going forward, the focus will be on both Android and HTML5. For example, the new Lightbox website and photo blogs are optimized for HTML5 web browsers, including Safari on the iPhone and iPad. Lightbox’s update was submitted to the Android Market this morning, and the rollout to all of Google’s servers should complete by 9 AM PST today. You can download the Android app here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Urbanspoon, the mobile restaurant recommendations and reservations application, is today adding a new feature called “Dineline,” which allows users to check-in to restaurants in order to track their dining habits. While most check-in apps are meant to register your presence at a venue for the purpose of game play, social networking, or receiving offers or discounts, Dineline is meant to be used to remember a meal, something more akin to Foodspotting than Foursquare. The feature, rolling out to iOS users this morning via an app update, adds a new icon to the Urbanspoon homescreen. For those of you who haven’t been on Urbanspoon for a while, it’s no longer just a clever slot machine-style toy to find new places to eat. It also lets you browse and search for restaurants, connect with friends, and snap and share photos of the restaurant or your meal. It’s this latter feature – the photo-sharing aspect to the service – that is most improved with the addition of Dineline, as it now gives that photo a more personal context and purpose. When you launch Urbanspoon now, a check-in button appears on the top right of the homescreen, allowing you to enter the “Where” and “When” of your latest meal. If you choose to share more information, you’re able to add a photo, meal price, notes and tap “I like it” or “I don’t” to save your quick opinion. From then on, that check-in and the additional information you added will be available in the Dineline section of the app for future reference. The app will even make you charts and graphs about your favorite cuisines, restaurants, neighborhoods and more. One nice thing about the check-in feature is that all this info can be added after the fact – which is great for those of you who don’t want to be the nerd at the table taking notes about your food. Just steal a quick photo and you can do the rest later. This is also handy for the security-conscious, who don’t want to broadcast where they are when not at home. Despite being called a “check-in,” the addition is clearly not mean to pit Urbanspoon against Foursquare or Facebook, as it’s more of a utility than a social feature. That makes a bit more sense than Yelp’s check-in, for example, which blatantly rips off Foursquare’s idea of “Mayors” for its “Dukes.” However, at least Yelp’s check-in lets you push your arrival out to Facebook and Twitter, but Urbanspoon is Twitter-only. That needs to change. (Seriously, the whole Twitter is about “tweeting what you had for lunch” thing is a myth. Most don’t). The Urbanspoon mobile apps have been downloaded over 20 million times across mobile platforms. The app update should roll out shortly on iOS. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Can ccLoop Rid Us Of Our Collective Email Woes? – I asked in a headline when the startup made its formal debut at TechCrunch Disrupt earlier this year. The answer, sadly, is a resounding no. Founded by serial entrepreneur Michael Wolfe, the company will shutter the service by January 9, 2012, and will henceforth focus on trying to solve user relationship management as Pipewise. The ceasing of ccLoop operations doesn’t come as a surprise – in fact, they announced that the service would be phased out over a month ago, albeit with a different timeframe given. Writes Wolfe in an email to users: We are announcing that we are stopping development on the ccLoop product. We have received a great deal of interest and positive feedback, but we saw a long and difficult path ahead to build ccLoop into a large business. Fixing email will have to be done by another startup, another day. Benchmark Capital, FLOODGATE, SV Angel, Felicis Ventures and Ariel Poler are investors in what is now Pipewise, and have collectively injected $3.5 million into the venture already. They will continue the back the startup, which aims to help companies “acquire, engage, convert, and support customers via web and mobile channels”. To learn more about Pipewise, check out and follow this Quora thread. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week at Le Web, Alexia interviewed Sean Parker and Shervin Pishevar onstage in what turned out to be one of the most-buzzed about sessions. Here is the full video for your weekend watching pleasure. It’s a great discussion that ranges across the state of startups, venture capital, music, and politics . Parker bemoans the surplus of venture capital  for its effect of diluting the talent in the tech industry, a point he’s made before. “It prevents the aggregation of talent around great ideas,” he says. He emphasizes the need for a great team from the get-go. “People are the greatest asset class,” Pishevar agrees. The conversation quickly turns to Gowalla, which recently was acquired by Facebook, and why it failed to take on Foursquare. “If you don’t fail, you haven’t tried hard enough,” says Pishevar. He warns against “success amnesia.” Behind every great success there are failures. Learn from them. “The product was too similar to Foursquare,” says Parker, noting the obvious. He thinks that “there were things they could have done,” which he suggested to the team at the time, but “they did not want to consider alternatives.” Both however say they are happy with the outcome (Parker is a big Facebook shareholder). Speaking about his own failures, Parker says, “We failed with Napster to build a legal licensing model. As a result, we watched the industry we loved collapse.” But “the biggest failure we made there was hiring. We built the wrong team.” He warns that when you have a startup with a lot of hype, “it inevitably attracts a certain breed of parasitic leech that if you do make the mistake of hiring, you have to realize your mistake quickly and eradicate it like you would any kind of insect.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily [Here’s a look at how startups backed by Y Combinator or TechStars compare in terms of funding, based on the data available in CrunchBase. The guest post below is written by Edmar Ferreira, a data scientist and founder of a data analysis startup called EverWrite. He writes about making data work on makeandthink.com.] Y Combinator and TechStars are two of the first seed-stage venture funds, and they’ve each had some successful companies. But how can we analyze how they’re doing so far? One way is acquisitions, but there’s not always complete information about who sold or for how much (and anyway, most of them haven’t sold yet). Another metric would be valuations — are companies becoming more valuable over time? — but we also don’t have good access to that. What we can do is look at the amount of money raised by the companies that participated in these programs. This is not a perfect metric of success, but it’s an interesting enough signal because most of these companies need funding during their early stages as they build their products and find markets. If they are making enough progress, investors will put in more money. Here’s a closer look, using data from CrunchBase. Note that both programs have been operating for rougly the same span of time — Y Combinator in 2005 and TechStars in 2006. Y Combinator is growing the size of its classes almost every year. There are two times more companies at it than at TechStars companies, based on the dataset. Quantity does not necessarily reflect in the quality of the portfolios, so let’s keep digging.  Y Combinator: 135 TechStars: 72 Raising a lot of money is not my definition of success, but it’s a good indication of the health of a startup in a lot of cases. Y Combinator companies as a whole raised ten times more money than TechStars companies, according to the data.  Part of the reason for this great distance are the massive rounds raised by DropBox and AirBnB. Those companies distort the data, yes, but that’s quite relevant: seed-stage investors want the huge hits. Y Combinator: $627 million TechStars: $61 million But in terms of how more typical startups do, the ability to raise rounds of funding shows they’re both doing about the same. While Y Combinator has more total rounds raised, but it also has more startups.  Y Combinator: 231 TechStars: 131 To look at how the average company does, though, we need another metric. So, we computed the median amount raised by companies in the subsequent round after the acceleration process. Half the Y Combinator companies raised more than $800,000 in the next round and half raised less. Half of TechStars raised more than $500,000, half less. In other words, Y Combinator companies appear to be valued more highly than TechStars by early-stage investors. Before you read too much into that, remember that other factors can impact this metric, too — the types of companies funded by each accelerator, the proliferation of deal-hungry angels near the program, etc….  YCombinator: $ 800,000 TechStars: $ 500,000 Y Combinator beat TechStars in many of these metrics, but none of these numbers translate to which (if either) is the best fit for your startup. That’s for you and them to figure out. If you can think of other analysis and other data that we can use, please let us know. Of course, in at least one important metric, TechStars has a huge advantage:  [Update: TechStars has used CrunchBase data, as well as data not available in CrunchBase, to create a fuller picture of how its companies are doing. You can find it here. We’re in the process of updating CrunchBase with this information. In the meantime, note that the data above is directionally accurate but not precise.] Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBilly Chasen’s Ultimate PivotWhen we first invited Billy Chasen to join us on Founder Stories he was working hard to make his startup, Stickybits a success. Turns out it never took off. But like many founders, Chasen bounced back and found better luck elsewhere. In this case it’s with Turntable.fm – a platform where people play DJ online and share music with others in virtual rooms. Having recently raised $7-million from investors that include Union Square Ventures and First Round Capital, we thought it would be interesting to catch-up with Chasen and hear how it all went down. Chasen tells Founder Stories host, Chris Dixon that when 2010 was drawing to a close, he reviewed “the health” of Stickybits and recognized it was mired in mediocrity. He says he didn’t have the passion to continue with the project and it seems his team wasn’t much more enthusiastic. “We were all building the app and none of us used the app.” Chasen continues, “there were two choices to make, there was either let’s just shut down the company and say Stickybits isn’t working and we all go off on our own, or we drastically change the company.” Option two won out and investors were on board, but Chasen admits he stumbled a bit when delivering the news to his staff. “One of the mistakes I made was I didn’t message it as well as I could have to my team. I basically came to them one day and was really just kind of like, we are going to do this now.” Having previously convinced others that Stickybits was the way to go, Chasen readily admits aspects of the transition were “terrifying.” He tells Dixon, “I thought Turntable was an amazing idea and I thought it could get the traction that it has gotten, but you don’t know at the time, it is not built, it is just a concept in your head and the worst thing that can happen is you say trust me again and you build that up and then… nobody likes it.” Make sure to watch the entire video to hear additional insights, including how Chasen came up with the idea for Turntable.fm. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring Drew Houston, Kevin Ryan, Mayor Bloomberg and many other leaders here. Episode II of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Couponing has been around forever, but the popularity of digital offers, daily deals, and group buying is fairly new. We’ve gone through the honeymoon period, watched the meteoric rise of Groupon, its overvaluation, IPO — and thankfully, through it all, we’ve seen increasing scrutiny on the space, especially over just how profitable daily deals actually are for local businesses.  The debate has raged over the daily deal model’s clever repackaging of old ideas and just how valuable the Groupon model is as an advertising mechanism for local merchants. Rocky was probably a little overzealous in saying that Groupon is poised for collapse, but there is no doubt that there are holes in its business model, just as there is no doubt that there are upsides to the model as a whole, both as an advertising channel and a tool for customer acquisition and retention.  In the end the scrutiny is essential, just as it is to find a middle ground — falling into the extremes of “daily deals are the best!” or “the daily deal industry needs to die!” misses the point that offers and daily deals can work, but only if they’re structured correctly. Otherwise, they can go wrong and go wrong quickly.  As Arash pointed out in his post this summer, the horror stories over daily deals often come from merchants who negotiate poor deal terms, don’t track redemption or customer spend, and don’t understand the economics of running a daily deal. Dr. Dholakia’s thorough analysis puts some numbers to the current flux in the daily deal industry, pointing out that 72.8 percent of merchants indicated openness to considering a different daily deal site. Merchants are open to trying your site’s model if you can prove that you have their best interest in mind and can structure deals that can help them retain customers and offer them more than a simple 50/50 split of profits. That’s how they can differentiate their value propositions. There may not be a cure-all model, but for the space to remain healthy going forward, it’s important to pose some prescriptions for merchants on how to structure daily deals so that they can get the most out of them. It’s an important conversation to have, and I hope you’ll weigh in. The Dealmix, a new daily deal aggregator and deal map founded by former Googlers to bring “a bit of organization and simplicity to the wild and wooly deal market”, has created an infographic for local businesses on how to design profitable deals and make them work.  Check it out and let us hear your feedback. Let’s make this industry better.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily This summer, Tandem Entrepreneurs raised a $40 million fund to continue investing in its incubator and capital fund, both focused exclusively on startups building solutions for the mobile space. One of the four companies (which includes JungleApps, GimmieWorld, and Flit) funded in Tandem’s most recent batch is coming out of private beta today to get young people off the couch and into the fray. UpOut, as its name implies, is an online event discovery service that wants to get you involved in fun activities that are happening right now, in realtime. Founded by two young Babson College entrepreneurs, Martin Shen and William King, UpOut is intending to do for local events what Yelp has done for the local restaurant market, showing what’s nearby, what’s inexpensive, and what people like you are recommending.  Co-founder Martin Shen says that the local events space is still largely dominated by traditional print media, like TimeOut and other hyperlocal weekly print (and online) publications. But he thinks that those traditional media outlets that have made the jump to the Web are outdated, inaccurate, and fail to offer simple ways to identify the most interesting events, especially those that pertinent to young people. The issue is that many young people, whether they’re in college, working at startups or big companies, are busy defining their careers, studying — in essence, they’re work a lot and they’re busy. But the younger working stiffs of the world are often forced to be spontaneous in their leisure or nightlife activities. Shen says that few young people plan a night’s activity much before they actually leave their apartments. That’s why UpOut is focusing on the spontaneity aspect of planning a night out, as the startup seeks to offer an event-centric, location-enabled solution that people can use while they’re on the go. Rather than combing through a list of events that may be expired, static or irrelevant, UpOut has created a service that is designed to recommend events and activities based on location, interests, social media signals, and your favorite venues — all based on what’s happening around you right now. Along with AOL and Yahoo, and hundreds of newsweeklies, there umpteen services that are trying (or have tried) to address local events, but both Tandem and UpOut believe that the “spontaneous” element has really been lacking in the many approaches taken to local event recommendations. Both King and Shen and had been running a web design business out of their dorm room at Babson, but Shen told us that he’s not a big planner, nor are most young people, and they were having trouble discovering cool events when they had opportunities to take a break from coding and designing. Shen said that he was tired of wheeling through event listings to find events that seemed appealing, only to show up and discover that the price of admission wasn’t exactly conducive to a founder — or college student’s — budget. So, he says that the partnerships that the team has forged, and the events database they’ve built, are focused on non-ticketed events. And when the events they showcase are ticketed, most tend to be under $40 — that’s where they see the most demand. UpOut is adding 1,000 entertainment events, happy hours, and specials a week (in categories like Arts, Music, Touristy, Relax, etc) — all of which are happening right now. Users can mark events they’re interested in as “awesome”, which can be saved for later viewing, or follow their favorite categories. The service also uses your event preferences to serve you more relevant results as you go.  Unfortunately for those not currently located in the Bay Area, UpOut’s event listings are SF-only at this point, but Shen says that the team is working on launching its service in new cities beginning in early 2012 — as well as launching a mobile app. The startup is using the infusion of capital from its Tandem investment to hire programmers. For more, check out UpOut at home here, and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily GAIN Fitness, a startup that creates personalized workouts based on certified trainers’ expertise, announced today that it has raised $650K in seed funding from InterWest Partners, Slide COO and angel investor Keith Rabois, Former Director of Platform at Facebook and Director of Partnerships, Content and Platforms at YouTube, Ben Ling, Michael Tanne, early founding YouTube team member Brent Hurley, Seraph Group and others. This comes on top of GAIN’s launch of its iPhone app in July, which allowed fitness enthusiasts to begin accessing their personalized routines via mobile. Founded by former Googlers, GAIN is all about allowing those looking to get in shape access to quality training regimens without having to pay for expensive personal trainers or go through the process of researching workouts by creating a symbiotic marketplace for both personal trainers and fitness consumers. GAIN’s iOS and web apps currently deliver these personalized workout experiences that can be experienced on the go, but the startup (backed by its new infusion of capital), aims to launch v3.0 of its iOS in January, which will supe up the platform, allowing its professional trainers to design and sell fitness multimedia “packs” that target specific fitness goals, usage scenarios — like at the gym, on the road, or at home, as well as different fitness levels.   This update will be a big lunge forward for GAIN as a GAIN, as it will give users of all stripes, body types, fitness levels — in any scenario — the opportunity to design personalized workout routines, or maintain their plans, from any location, regardless of schedule.  Those with demanding jobs, schedules, and full travel schedules are all too aware of the cost these things can have on staying in shape. The key for success for a young startup (aside from funding, etc.) is listening to feedback from your users, even if taking their feedback to heart means “pivoting” or adapting your service to meet their needs. In the case of GAIN, Founder and CEO Nick Gammell said that, initially, the teams’ focus was solely on the Web.  From the beginning, they’ve wanted to become an “anytime, anywhere” fitness resource, but the Web continues to be the venue of choice for more complex schedule, discovery, and social tools. But the startup’s 600K+ users wanted to be able to access their fitness routines on the go, and so GAIN, which had building an iOS app on the side, launched a paid app. But users weren’t happy about the pay grade, so they relaunched the app for free. Since then, he says, users have been using GAIN’s workout building and tracking tools 4 to 5 times more, per user, compared to its web app. Now, Gammell said, the service is at a place where 40 percent of sessions are happening via mobile device, a bulk of which has come since the free app launched in October. In case you needed another example of how free beats the paywall, it seems GAIN is it. GAIN also happens to look great, which is easy when you have the original designer of Google-acquired Picasa and NASA app developers on your team. With more than 700-plus exercises (strength, plyometric, callisthenic, yoga), as well as custom-tailored workouts, the startup is attempting to democratize the fitness experience, and so far it seems to be working. It will have to considering the plethora of gamified fitness startups out there, like Fitocracy, or any number of other cool startups, like Fitango, CrossFit, Fitbit, RunKeeper, WellnessFX — not to mention wellness devices. It’s wonderful to see, because we, as a country need to stay in better shape. The startup plans to announce its trainer partners, along with its new iOS marketplace in January 2012, and Gammell says that an Android app is on its way.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily As the new founder in residence at SV Angel, Paul McKellar is part of the next layer of web and mobile entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley. People who have come here and been through a couple startups over the last several years – in his case, his own company, then Square — and are now moving into financial and advising roles. That is, at least before they go found more companies. I talked with McKellar by phone yesterday to hear a little more about what he’ll be doing in his new job. Backed by Ron Conway and headed up by David Lee, SV Angel is one of the more connected and prolific angel investors. It has had one other founder in residence that I know of, BookFresh and FreshGuide founder Ryan Donahue. McKellar has been in the middle of the action here for the last several years, having been on the founding team of Square since 2009, where he worked on the API and web interface for the payments service provider. He arrived here via Y Combinator in early 2007, developing an anonymous conversations site called Socialmoth that he’d created while a research engineer at Georgia Tech. He turned the site into a Facebook app when the social network launched its platform that May, which he eventually sold. In my interview with him, below, he discusses the early days of Square, how entrepreneurs should think about approaching investors, and what he’ll be doing with SV Angel. TechCrunch: So you were early in Square. How did that come about? Paul McKellar: I had been working on credit cards online around the same time Jack [Dorsey] was starting Square, or as it was called at that point Squirrel. We had met already because I’d been in the Twitter offices when it was eight people in South Park. We met for coffee, I saw and raved about the product, and within 15 minutes he offered me a job. I actually said no because I enjoy doing my own thing, but changed my mind about two weeks later which turned out to be a good decision. TechCrunch: What did you learn from working there in the early days? Paul McKellar: It was an unusually fast-growing company. We grew from 25 to 75 in 2010, and managed to do a surprising number of things right early on. The Square interface on the iPhone, for example, had the same alignment of form, and same organization since the very beginning. The way the price is displayed, the credit card sale, the description — it all encourages the right order for convenient transactions, and it hasn’t really changed from the beginning. I remember Jack and Robert Anderson agonizing for this detail for hours in Jack’s apartment. It took a lot of work to get it right and because of that, it hasn’t changed. TechCrunch: How’d you end up at SV Angel? Paul McKellar: I’d been meeting the team over the years at tech events, and had always gotten along with them. Kevin had reached out when they started doing the founder-in-residence program. TechCrunch: Tell me about your new role now? What’s your focus going to be? Paul McKellar: It’s basically like an entrepreneur-in-residence. Go to the Monday meetings, listen to conversations about which companies are under consideration. Being there will help me get more of a perspective on bigger trends, and meet people who are working on other things outside of the entrepreneurs and developers I know. The team is also small and informal, and focused on very early-stage deals, which are all things I can appreciate. I’ve been looking a lot at mobile. I’d say mobile-social but that tends to make people think of Instagram or GroupMe and I’m more interested in social utilities. TechCrunch: iPhone or Android? Paul McKellar: iPhone. TechChrunch: You’d recommend building for both? Paul McKellar: All apps should be launched on both. It’s a false dichotomy. Android devices are going to be ubiquitous. You might not have an Android phone, but you might have an Android fridge or an Android stereo or an Android TV. Apple is never going to let iOS be installed in a car, that is never going to happen. But Android will. You are going to see Android everywhere. TechCrunch: Could this position lead you to join or incubate a company as part of the job? Paul McKellar: I’m looking to start a company with a friend or someone who I know I work with really well. Because of that, it is unlikely that I will join any company I notice because of SVAngel. TechCrunch: Any advice for founders? Paul McKellar: Make the decision to invest in your company very very easy. Make it easy for someone to understand what your company is, who your market is, why you’re the people to solve the problem. Good investors look at a lot of different deals and have to make fast decisions with little information. The easier you make it, the more competitive you are. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Adzerk, the ad-serving technology startup which raised $650K in seed funding this July, is launching its next phase, called adOS. The new platform is intended as an evolution of its current product, and is offering improved ad-serving code plus a marketplace where publishers can find third-party apps to install. Yep – it’s an app store for ad tech. For publishers under 100 million impressions per month, Adzerk’s ad-serving technology is free, which is one way Adzerk aims to attract new interest. Currently, StackOverflow, Tippr, Land8 Media and StatSheet are using Adzerk, as are a number of ad networks. In many cases, however, Adzerk’s technology is being white-labeled, so the company can’t disclose the names of those users. Adzerk started out as an internal, proprietary technology used in two niche ad networks run by founder James Avery – The Lounge and Ruby Row. Avery then spun out Adzerk to sell his software. With AdOS, ad-serving technology is a part of the platform, but the big deal here is the  new marketplace. When it launches publicly (it’s in private beta now), AdOS will feature around 100 “apps,” which includes things like targeting tools, other ad networks, features AdZerk itself offers (like the ability to manage an ad network), custom creatives and more.  By February or March, the company plans to release an SDK which will allow developers to create new custom creatives and sell them in the AdOS store. For example, Avery tells us of a creative in development that pulls in live Twitter data within the ad. The core idea with AdOS is to solve the challenge for publishers where there are too many ad serving tools available for use, leading to confusion. AdOS, and its “app store” concept will help publishers find the tools they want, while also knowing that all those on the AdOS platform will work together. Want to use Google AdSense? You just click the little green “install” button and fill in the form. Want to install an ad network you’ve never used? You click the green “apply” button to sign up. It’s a one-stop shop. AdOS is today launching into private beta, and will allow select publishers early access to the new platform for testing purposes. The public platform launch is planned for early next year. Adzerk arrived this spring, after a beta period in 2010. As noted above, it has already raised $650K in seed funding, but will be looking to raise a Series A starting in Q1 2012. The plan is to use the new funding to double the size of its now nine-person team. Since its launch, Adzerk has gained “hundreds” of customers, says Avery, but the company won’t disclose the exact number. Publishers interested in AdOS can sign up here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Amid talks of a Groupon acquisition, the smart local recommendations app Alfred has arrived on Android. Alfred serves up personalized suggestions for nearby restaurants, coffee shops, bars and nightclubs using a combination of artificial intelligence and machine-learning algorithms to develop personal “taste graphs” for its users. Previously an iOS-only app, the big news for Alfred’s second platform launch is not just the expanded reach, but also how the team at Clever Sense has approached the Android port. Instead of simply reproducing the familiar Alfred interface using different code, Clever Sense created a second native app specifically designed to take advantage of features and interactions found on the Android platform. On Android, Alfred looks totally different.  Immediately after the app’s installation and launch, a screen asks you if you want to save the app to your homescreen. Having used Android for over a year myself, I’m surprised more Android apps don’t do this. (Android apps are hidden away by default in most cases, allowing users to customize multiple homescreens with their own selection of apps and widgets.) After launching Alfred, the app walks you through the “getting to know you” quiz which asks you to teach it about some of your preferences. You can opt out of the quiz, but that wouldn’t be a great idea. Alfred’s algorithms get better the more you train them, so it’s worthwhile to give the app’s smarts a kickstart via the quiz. When you arrive on Alfred’s main screen, this is where you’ll see the most startling departure from the iOS user interface. Instead of thumbnail photos you tap (e.g., lunch, dinner, etc.) to swipe through place recommendations, there are colored circles for “Ideas,” “Profile” and “Teach.” The Ideas circle, when tapped, take you through a list you scroll through up and down to choose the category. And when you’re in a category (e.g. “coffee and tea”), there’s a toolbar at the bottom that lets you view the recommendations as cards like on iOS, on a map or as a list. It allows you to apply filters to the recommendations. The end result is a bit more of a geeky take on Alfred, which, frankly, is perfect for the Android user base. Android users are often interested in things like tweaks, customizations, and heavy personalization, thanks to the platform’s openness. There’s an enjoyment of apps, in many cases, as tools that help you get the job done, instead of “experiences” like on iOS. That’s not a bad thing, mind you, but it’s different. To date, Alfred has served up 21 million recommendations to users, up from 7 million in October. And users have liked 4.6 million places, up from 2 million. But the company won’t disclose the actual user base numbers at this time. Clever Sense had previously said that restaurants and the like was just the first step for the use of Alfred’s technology. It was looking into delivering personalized deal recommendations from sites like Groupon and LivingSocial in its next phase. That would explain Groupon’s interest in the matter. But while that would be likely be a nice exit for the company, it would be a shame for Alfred’s happy users to lose this app, especially now that it came to Android.  Alfred is live on the Android Market here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Serial Internet entrepreneur and angel investor Fabrice Grinda took the stage at Le Web this morning to share his thoughts on investing in Russia, Brazil and other emerging markets and general lessons he’s learned as a global angel investor. Grinda, who is French but currently resides in New York, says he’s made every mistake you can possibly make, but that he’s getting better with every investment deal he inks (he and his team have backed 90 startups to date). So why does he invest in Russia and Brazil? Grinda pointed out that Brazil is not just Rio, football and favelas, but also home to an entire ecosystem of Internet companies, some of which have already gone successfully public and some of which are insanely profitable and booking hundreds of millions of dollars in annual revenue. Brazil is obviously a big market, with 200 million people of which roughly 70 million are in the Internet. It is also a fairly rich country, with a growing economy and the largest e-commerce market in Latin America, which is ideally fertile ground for Internet startups to rise and shine. Russia, says Grinda, is pretty much the same story. Huge market, booming startup ecosystem, largest country in the world (140 million people, 60 million Internet users) and a growing Internet economy with major players like Yandex and Mail.ru. Grinda says he started investing in Brazilian and Russan Internet companies because the world is less flat than people would have you believe, particularly when it comes to venture capital, so the opportunities were there. There’s no real globalization when it comes to making investments, he points out, with only about 20 percent of venture capital being deployed across-borders and obvious trading and travel barriers getting in the way of doing it adequately. Grinda also talked about his early experiences as an angel investor. After selling his last company, which made him a relatively wealthy man, he invested $6 million in 6 startups. All of them failed. Talking about some of the mistakes he’s made, he shared an anecdote about a Russian entrepreneur encountering problems someone in the US would never face when trying to build an e-commerce business (major logistics issues in a large country, and couriers who steal both products and the cash they receive for, well, not delivering them to buyers). In Brazil, it’s a different story, purports Grinda. Logistics and payments work there, but it’s a dangerously litigious country, so startups often find themselves getting sued to oblivion. Grinda shared a story with the audience about a local e-commerce company that had its domain name taken away by some Brazilian judge, effectively killing its business overnight. Grinda says he’s learned the hard way that it’s better to make smaller investments in a lot of companies then bet bigger on fewer companies. He refers to this “spray and pray” methodology as a more realistic model to become successful as an angel investor. He only invests in consumer-facing companies because he lacks the time for thorough due diligence, and never takes a board seat at any of the startups in his portfolio, preferring to be a passive investor that responds quickly to specific questions from the entrepreneurs he backs. About 25 percent of his investments are in the US, and 75 percent in the ‘rest of the world’ (meaning big markets like Brazil, Russia, Germany and Turkey, China and UK). A lot of those are businesses ‘copying’ (aka cloning) successful models that were proven by other companies in the US or elsewhere, which he’s perfectly fine with. He also talked about his 9 selection criteria for investments, which he outlined in the past, in much more detail, on his blog here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Do you lose things? Despite being meticulous about personal hygiene and a snappy dresser, I tend to misplace things. I blame it on bad parenting, of course. But, we all lose our personal items — and as much as it pains us — our gadgets are often the victims. Smartphones, especially iPhones, have been known to surreptitiously slip out of pockets at inappropriate times. Unfortunately, unlike our vehicles, most gadgets do not have panic buttons, or remote key access — although there are some tracking apps that get close. In fact, there are umpteen ways to find lost iPhones, or track your stolen hardware. Apple’s Find My iPhone has traditionally been the best way to safeguard against permanently losing an iPhone, running in the background (once set up) until you need to locate it. (And for Samsung/Android users, there’s always stuff like this.) But, of course, we have other personal items that are often lost, whether they be gadgets, like iPods, or car/house keys, etc.  Launching this week with its MVP is a startup and its eponymous free iPhone app called Fownd, which simply put, helps return your lost items — one and all. Well, maybe not children, but most everything else. Cofounded by Drew Izzo (the former CMO of Ancestry.com and Roost.com, among others), Fownd customizes a homescreen photo of your choice to include a message that enables the finder of a lost item to connect with the owner — essentially, a terrific complementary service to Find My iPhone. What do I mean? Well, along with its free iPhone app, Fownd sells tags that you can add to your keys, cameras, flip phones, and just about every other important item that can go missing. These pages of 10 tags sell for $0.99, and can be ordered directly from the app.   As you can see, the tags come in different sizes, with adhesive on one side, so that you can stick them to your personal items — even your smallest ones. One of these tags may take up a lot of space relative to the size of, say, your iPod Nano, but it’s not always about image here, people, think of the utility. Izzo did say that the product is still in its early stages, as Fownd has a team of four working on their product, some of whom have full-time jobs, and tags will likely continue to be improved upon and refined, until that are at maximum elegance. But the point is that, once you download the app and receive your tags, you are free to register them all through the Fownd app on your iPhone. If they happen to get lost, the finder simply texts the code provided on the tag to the number given — all anonymously — and voila! Because Fownd sends these “connection” messages to your email, iPhone and alternate phone numbers that you provide when you register, you are thus able to be reconnected with your beloved devices/keys. You can see an example text that you might receive in the image to the right.   The homescreen tag is a good quick safeguard for your iPhone, but in the event that your phone runs out of batteries, (something the iPhone 4S especially has been known to do, although it has gotten better with the new software updates), you can just add a physical tag as a backup. Though, hopefully the finder will be so kind as to charge the phone. Fownd is also working on getting its web client up and running (which it should soon), so you’ll be able to track your iPhone and all other personal nicknacks and doodads from — you guessed it — the Web, and view your phone’s location on GPS via a handy map. It’s a simple product in conceit, but it works, and it’s a great complement to Find My iPhone, so that users can now keep track of their iPhones and even hope to reconnect with lost feature phones, iPods, keys, and more. And what’s better than saving money on replacing keys, or that 8 million dollar Apple product you just bought? For more, check out Fownd here. The team is looking for feedback, as the product is still in early stages, so fire away with your suggestions. Android apps are currently in the works. Update: Commenters have pointed out that there are some similar services out there, like RewardTag, Stuffbak, and another newcomer Pleasereturn.me. (Thanks, guys!) Competition is important, and each service has its benefits, so we encourage you to check them all out. In terms of differentiation, the latter two do offer rewards for returning lost items — a great incentive for those who might not return something out of the kindness of their hearts.  But, Fownd (in its current iteration) beats them all in terms of price. It’s the cheapest. And in terms of the oldest (and perhaps) most well known, Stuffbak, you get two free years of return service, then you have to pay for a subscription. There are a whole mess of catches, and their site reads like some kind of untrustworthy informercial. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Since launching early last year, young social travel site Gogobot has been off to a pretty good start, or at least it has, shall we say, been hitting all the stops. As Jason pointed out recently, it was named one of Time’s top sites for 2011, won a Crunchie for best design in 2010, and brought its total funding to just under $20 million with a series B raise from Redpoint Ventures, Battery Ventures and CrunchFund. It launched a good looking iOS app in October, and has seen its user base grow 10x in the last six months. But, so what, right? As we’ve written before, the travel space is rife with newcomers. And TripAdvisor, the leader in the space and the veteran incumbent is on its way towards an IPO, but there are still a few things it doesn’t do as well as some of the younger travel sites. Gogobot CEO Travis Katz specifically cites fraud and the fact that most reviews are left by strangers — not your friends — and it’s this social travel recommendation functionality that Gogobot, I would agree, does fairly well. The trick for these young startups is to leverage the wealth of data now available from social and LBS services to give their own apps and websites a more robust set of features, and Gogobot has followed suit, integrating with Facebook, Foursquare, sharing via Twitter, etc. Part of its success is thanks to a veteran team of former Myspacers (and Ori Zaltzman, one of the guys who built Yahoo Answers), who’ve gone down this road before and know which social buttons to press (and which ones not to touch with a 10 foot pole).  The other key is that Gogobot has built a reservoir of travel photos, and its iOS app allows users to select their current location, snap a photo choose from different filters (like the Instagram for travel), and turn those into geo-tagged postcards. With its new mobile app giving users the ability to create geo-tagged postcards on location during their travels, Gogobot’s announcement today that it will be integrating with Flipboard — the iPad’s social magazine of record — makes a lot of sense.  The integration will take a realtime stream of travel photos and experiences from around the globe, generated using Gogobot’s iOS app, and transform them into a travel magazine. This will allow both users to flip through global postcards in a Flipboard magazine-like experience to reflect on their travels, or to let users at home browse photos from the comfort of their iPads, discovering new places and getting inspiration for their next trip.  Each photo that one takes with Gogobot can now be transformed into a postcard, automatically uploaded to their Gogobot Guide, easily shared to Facebook, Twitter, and now Flipboard in a magazine-style spread. Also of note: Fotopedia launched Flipboard integration this week to create a tech-style magazine for the Le Web Conference in Paris. For more, check out Gogobot at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Comparison shopping site NexTag has made its fifth acquisition in 15 months, buying event ticket search engine FanSnap. Unfortunately, FanSnap employees and any other common stockholders won’t get anything out of the deal, according to a source close to the transaction. Apparently the purchase price was low, and FanSnap had taken over $15 million in funding primarily from General Catalyst Partners. That means even if the investors were paid back, there’d be nothing left for common stockholders. There were high hopes for FanSnap, which lets users search for tickets across big providers like StubHub and eBay, leading us to liken it to a Kayak for event tickets  back in 2009. Heck, its backer General Catalyst was also a major investor in Kayak, and FanSnap was founded by StubHub CMO Mike Janes. But it seems that FanSnap didn’t gain enough traction, and eventually its technology that surfaced low priced event tickets became more widely available, leading to the reportedly low sum paid for the company. The ticket search engine should do well under the NexTag umbrella, though, which can drive it traffic. By acquiring FanSnap, NexTag will become a one-stop ecommerce shop for coupons, products, entertainment experiences, and lodging. NexTag CEO Jeffrey G. Katz says “customers will be able to scoop up some of the best tickets possible to their favorite sporting or music events, find a room to stay in, and outfit the whole family in related gear.” FanSnap’s team will relocate to Nextag’s headquarters in San Mateo, CA where they’ll join employees scooped up through NexTag’s other acquisitions. It bought real-time shopping social shopping platform ThingBuzz in October 2011, German comparison shopping site guenstiger.de GmbH in April 2011, and before that NextCoupons, and product review company Wize, Inc. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ness Computing has just launched a new version of its restaurant search engine app that takes its existing recommendations technology and adds in new sharing services. Yes, there are plenty of restaurant recommendations apps out there, and social tie-ins are increasingly common on mobile devices. But what Ness does is already special, and getting better with the new version. The company has spent years developing machine learning technology that looks at your social data from sites like Facebook, Foursquare and Twitter, as well as your behavior, and figures out which nearby restaurants you’ll like most.  It presents this data in a score from 0% to 100% match in a classy scrolling interface. Instead of going to a site like Yelp and seeing every restaurant with 3.5 to 4.5 stars, as cofounder and chief executive Corey Reese tells me, you get an exact percentage based on its analysis, along with explicit ratings from your friends to highlight what matters. (Note that it has bigger plans for applying this tech, as we’ve covered, but it’s focused on restaurants for starters). Having launched in late August, it has spent the intervening months refining its system using the 1.5 million ratings generated by the 100,000 users it has accumulated. The result is even finer-grained recommendations. The new social features should help it get out in front of more users. The core additions include a way to post thank-you notes and reviews to Facebook. Just click on the photo of your friend in their review to send the note, or write a review and share it on your wall and news feed. The homescreen also now shows mouthwatering photos of dishes from various cuisines, based on what it thinks you like most (you can swipe to pick different ones). The app has upgraded its provides friend recommendations and notifications integrations with iOS5, too.  The getting-started process for new users has also been rearranged from the previous version to highlight sharing. In a series of three steps, you connect with Facebook or Foursquare (Twitter is coming later), and it starts pulling information about you and your friends from those platforms. The second step asks you to provide ten ratings of various nearby locations — as with the previous version, this helps it build on your social data. Then it asks you to invite friends. Overall, Ness’s tech effort has resulted in much better results for users, and the interface makes the experience more enjoyable. But it’s still hitting a crowded market that has established competitors like Yelp and Urbanspoon. The one-off recommendation improvements that it can provide are often subtle, so integrating social features could help it break out. The new version is now live in the iTunes App Store (here). Latest headlines delivered to you daily As location gradually becomes more important to the on-the-go consumer, what with daily deals, check-in coupons, and local promotions, so that consumer’s fine location becomes more important to merchants. GPS and wi-fi can only get you so far, though, and inside a mall or airport it’s much more difficult and inefficient to narrow down a user’s location to anything approaching usability. There are systems for tracking people and devices indoors, but Scottish startup Sensewhere (formerly Satsis) says they’ve leapfrogged existing solutions. Their new “self-correcting” location-sensing network will allow for quick and low-power situation of devices to within 5m by forming a sort of constantly updated mesh of self-aware devices. The company, which split off from research at the University of Edinburgh and got its launch money through awards and loans, received £1.2 million in funding from private equity firms just this last August. They’re making their public launch nowish (there have been a few news items over the last week or so) and have made an app available on iOS and Android. Their technology is similar to existing indoor-tracking systems, but the company says theirs is superior due to its self-updating nature: If you cut through the marketing there, what you basically have is a self-updating network with devices pinging a central server with the networks they see (wi-fi, Bluetooth, RF, etc.) and their position as best they can determine, and that central server continually collates this data and updates the map, using mobile nodes as reference as well as stationary ones. Assuming the system works, it could be a great add-on for megastructures like department stores and airports, with tons of device traffic and square footage. While I’m sure it falls short of the idea right now, one imagines the endpoint: get a promo deal when you walk into a store that expires when you walk out – that sort of thing. Right now it’s available as an app, but it seems unlikely that they’ll see uptake in that form. They’ll have to go white-label and market themselves as a customizable solution for individual locations – that or talk with mapping or deal companies and get themselves integrated at a lower level. No hardware is required for setup at your local mall, but places will still have to tie in and do setup – there’s a lot of low-level work to be done there interfacing with small stores, corporate offices, and so on. Retail is a nightmare but they are always up for new marketing opportunities. The Sensewhere site is pretty spartan at the moment, but you can get more info on the apps into which the service is integrated through them. The system is described in more detail in their press release and at Crowdsourcing. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in March, SCVNGR launched a product to complement its mobile scavenger hunt called LevelUp that essentially took on Groupon and the daily deals industry with a mobile product that focused squarely on one of the biggest problems with that very industry: Customer retention and loyalty. LevelUp, and Founder Seth Priebatsch inked deals with American Express and a few others to enable users to redeem their deals by swiping their credit cards. Fast forward to the last month of 2011 and LevelUp looks a bit different than it did at the outset. The context is simple: Mobile payment solutions stand to be a big business over the next five years, but as they stand right now, carriers and the makers of mobile OSes are finding it hard to come to terms (see Verizon’s treatment of Google Wallet), and users suffer by being subjected to these obstacles.  So, the SCVGR spin-off is today launching a mobile payments web app to complement its existing native apps to allow anyone on a web-connected device to pay with their phone — using any credit card or any web-connected device with a simple QR code. For now (or until we see a more widespread adoption), LevelUp allows users to bypass NFC or needing specific cards to link to a certain device and carrier on a particular version of Android. Priebatsch wants to do away with the limitations imposed on mobile payments solutions by niche requirements, allowing anyone with a web-connected device (and soon an offline, HTML5 version of the app) to show up at their favorite merchants and just pay. Building on its previous functionality, LevelUp is now combining mobile payments and loyalty rewards — as users can visit any merchant that accepts LevelUp to pay with their smartphones and save money while doing it. LevelUp is designed so that users have instant credit waiting for them the first time they use the app, with the ability to unlock further credits toward their purchases when they revisit their favorite merchants. Merchants are able to use the solution by through a LevelUp reader or by downloading the LevelUp Merchant app, which then provides local businesses with analytics, insight into the behavior of their customers, which are their most loyal customers, savings on interchange fees, etc. LevelUp is currently available in San Francisco, New York, Boston, and Philadelphia, with more than 200 merchants accepting the payments solution in Boston and Philadelphia, for example. As the second product from SCVNGR, LevelUp has access to the 2 million users and 5,000 enterprises using SCVNGR (and the nearly $20 million it’s raised in funding). SCVNGR is now at 104 employees, with 40 more joining in January to build out the LevelUp team, specifically the sales force, which will help speed up adoption among local businesses and push the product into further markets. Priebatsch said that LevelUp has already been seeing some encouraging adoption stats, among them that 60 percent of all LevelUp customers return to merchants which they’ve already patronized, with the average LevelUp user saving $25 to $50 a month. LevelUp is currently at about 100K users a month, which the founder expects to increase as more SCVNGR users adopt and as the solution pushes into more cities. LevelUp has partnered with T-Mobile to help it achieve national scale, and distribute the merchant-side payment solutions, which they’ve been offering at discounts — along with data plans to back the infrastructure of the LevelUp network. Latest headlines delivered to you daily January 31, 2012						 |Davies Symphony Hall, San Francisco, CA			  As open nominations for the 5th annual Crunchies awards enters its final week (nominate here until Dec 13), it’s time to figure out which are the best startups and products of 2011. The Crunchies, which we co-host along with GigaOm and VentureBeat, has 20 categories spanning from Best Mobile App to Best VC. We’ve introduced some new categories this year such as Best Tablet App, Best Shopping App, and Biggest Social Impact. But the most anticipated awards, the ones we save for last, are Best Overall Startup and Best New Startup of 2011. Last year, Twitter won Best Overall and Quora won Best New Startup. Who will win this year? There are plenty of amazing startups to choose from. In the Best Overall category strong contenders include Airbnb, Dropbox and Square. They each grew like crazy this year and raised tons of money. Best New Startup is a tougher category. We allow startups that either were founded or launched during the year. Some names to think about here include Pinterest, Turntable.fm, Nest, Codecademy, Getaround, and Warby Parker. Who do you think deserves to be named the best startup of the year? Nominate them on the Crunchies voting site and make your case in the comments below. The 5th Annual Crunchies Awards Tuesday, January 31, 2012 Louise M. Davies Symphony Hall201 Van Ness Ave.San Francisco, CA 7:30pm – midnight – Awards Ceremony and After PartyA night of celebration with festive attire. Tickets will be released in batches starting early December. Davies Symphony Hall can seat over 2,000 attendees, double the size of previous Crunchies Awards. Nominations open: Friday, November 18thNominations close: Tuesday, December 13th at 11:59pm PSTFinalists announced: early January Our sponsors help make the Crunchies happen, if you are interested in learning more about sponsorship opportunities during the ceremony or after-party, please contact Jeanne Logozzo at jeanne [at] techcrunch [dot] com. For press credentials, please fill out this request form and confirmations will be sent separately via email. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Writing a business plan is no easy task — it can be painstaking. If you’ve ever written one, you’re probably familiar with the many websites that offer those static business plan and projections templates and galleries. They can be a great point of reference, but oftentimes they’re just that. Cynthia McCahon founded Enloop because she wanted to build a better resource for entrepreneurs gritting their teeth over their business plans, and because she’d watched many friends and colleagues sink time and money into business ideas that just weren’t going anywhere. Hoping to take a bit of the emotion out of an emotional process, Enloop was founded as a way for entrepreneurs to create business plans from scratch, guide them through the business plan process, and offer a system that provides thorough and intelligent risk analysis to give founders a sense of whether or not they’re off on the right track. Enloop’s solution is free and easy to use and automates the business plan process, because many first-time entrepreneurs just aren’t sure what to say to investors or underwriters — or how to say it. The startup’s patented system, created by MBAs, accountants, and software developers, generates the basic text of the business plan, explaining each important section to you as you change your inputs, toy with different scenarios, while Enloop automatically updates the financial data in that text as you go. The solution also automatically creates customized financial forecasts for your business, like sales, profit and loss, cash flow, and balance sheets. Entrepreneurs can start with creating a simple plan based on annual inputs, or generate more complex forecasts up to 3 year projections for CPAs and accountants. One simple plan is free, whereas three plans and 36-month projections will cost $10 per month, and unlimited will run $40 a month. But the real kicker is Enloop’s Performance Score (EPS), which is a FICO-style score for your business plan, which updates as you change your financial information, rising when it likes how you’re planning your business, and decreasing when you veer off the right path. The score is designed to be your devil’s advocate, your conscience — a safeguard against unstable or unworkable business plans in an attempt to save your business from the deadpool.  Today, Enloop is also announcing some new functionality to go along with its business plan forecasting and “Klout score” for business plans, as it now allows your friends and colleagues to view and edit your plan(s). With any subscription, users can share the plan with as many people as they’d like (including their their CPA, business advisor or loan officer), and once invited collaborators can edit and print the plan, with the Enloop Performance Score changing in realtime. This is great, because you really don’t want business plan writing to be a solitary process, but at the same time, features like this are best offered for free. With Enloop generating a professionally formatted PDF document that’s ready to download, print, and share with any number of people that are critical to the process — it takes a lot of the pain out of having to string together the right words to describe the thrust of your business for investors and beyond. And, with a predictive algorithm that offers you a reality check and a glimpse into whether or not you’re building the next Google — well, couple this with InDinero and I’d say you’ve got yourself one helluva deal. Latest headlines delivered to you daily So you’ve just landed in Pittsburgh and you don’t know anyone. If you’re like me, you hit the local Eat’n’Park and stare at people from your booth, crying while eating fries. With Tripl, however, I can meet some of the movers and shakers in the locality, network like a champ, and generally leave the hellscape that is my dark, lonely soul. Win-win. The service has just come out of beta and is available to try here. To use it, you login using Facebook and recommend folks who you think are important in the places you’ve visited. They can be anyone, from VCs to raver kids. Then when you plan a trip you can see who is who in town and connect with them. On the surface, the service makes sense: its nice to know a local. In practice? Ehhhh… maybe it’s the grump in me but I want to show someone around the neighborhood like I want a hole in the head. If you’re an extrovert, however, this is right up your alley. There is also a network effect at work here. Tripl needs a wider user base to  be actually useful in that it matches folks with each other based on a few basic characteristics. As it stands, it’s kind of a Silicon Alley/Valley sort of situation where the early adopters have shown up. I’d love to meet a museum curator in Barcelona, for example, to discuss Woody Allen over cava and octopus or perhaps a beautiful female Jai Alai player who is really a spy in Haifa who will embroil me in an international plot of intrigue and mystery. Instead it shows me Ouriel Ohayon.  It’s a fascinating concept, Tripl is, and the UI is quite smooth and attractive. Is it for me? I can respond with a resounding “maybe.” I suspect my travels will bring me to places covered by Tripl but I also have a feeling that many trips to out of the way places – where you definitely need a local to convince you not to drink yourself, Apocolypse Now-style, into a blubbering mess at the hotel bar and then go back to your room for some alone time – won’t be covered here. I could be wrong. David Los and Peter Sullivan founded the company in Stockholm. Peter went to Sweden as a student and essentially stayed, finding the bracing air and short, riotus summers to his liking. However, like many of us, he wanted to meet other people in other cities and thus Tripl was born. It’s funded by a $300,000 angel round and run by a very small team along with some European programmers.  Give it a try and see how you like it. I’m apparently a local in New York and if you travel here I’ll be happy to suggest some places you can go, many of them that won’t be actual swear words. Technology has a tendency to pull us apart. I guess Tripl is trying, in its own convoluted way, to bring us together. This slideshow requires JavaScript. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Chartboost, the newly launched (already profitable) direct deals marketplace for mobile game developers is today announcing its expansion to Android. The company provides free ad-serving technology for direct deals and cross-promotions via its Chartboost SDK, allowing publishers to retain 100% of the revenue share on their direct deals. Meanwhile, the company’s opt-in ad network offers revenue sharing with publishers to help fill unsold inventory. The expansion to Android was based on strong demand from Chartboost’s current game publisher clients, a list that includes big names like Tinyco, Pocket Gems, Storm8, Funzio, Dinsey Mobile, Gameview, Crowdstar and Animoca. Chartboost is also now adding a few more top brands to its customer base, including Booyah, Funzio and Out Fit 7. According to CEO Maria Alegre, there are now 200 publishers using the service with around 400 or so apps.  In Chartboost, the focus is not on banner advertising, but on customizable, white-labeled full-screen interstitials that are used to suggest new games to the app’s users. The ads perform better than banners because they’re not necessarily perceived as ads, but as game recommendations. The CTR’s for these interstitials are, on average, around 12%, says Alegre, and she expects that to remain the same as Chartboost heads to Android. However, she notes that iOS ads can often see CTR’s in the range of 15%-16%. Chartboost closed $2 million in Series A funding in October, with Translink Capital, SKTVC and XG Ventures. The company’s focus going into 2012 is on international expansion, especially Asia. Chartboost for Android was previously available in a closed beta only, but is now available for any developer to use. Sign up is here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Silicon Valley company Bill.com, which offers Web-based bill payment, invoicing and cash management solutions for businesses, this morning announced that it has raised $15.5 million in Series D funding, bringing its total raised to over $40 million. The financing round was led by new investor Financial Partners Fund (a unit of Citi Capital Advisors), with previous Bill.com backers DCM, Emergence Capital Partners, August Capital, Jafco Ventures and Total Technology Ventures participating. Without sharing specific numbers, Bill.com says it has grown over 300 percent this year, with “tens of thousands of new customers and vendors” joining its network, and now more than $3 billion now under management within the Bill.com platform.  Bill.com integrates with most major accounting and banking systems, including QuickBooks online, Intacct, NetSuite, and Sage Peachtree, along with Google Apps and PayPal Business integration. August Capital partner David Hornik makes the comparison to Jack Dorsey-led startup Square, pointing out that Bill.com “moves more money than Square each month”. Ok then! Latest headlines delivered to you daily Plum District, a daily deals site for moms, is announcing today it has closed $20 million in Series C financing led by General Catalyst Partners, bringing its total funding amount to $30 million. The company is also announcing it has acquired two other startups: the newly launched mobile loyalty platform Chatterfly and a direct competitor, DoodleDeals, a daily deals service for parents. The Series C funding round also saw participation from existing investor Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers, plus new investors Comcast Ventures and Duke University. In addition, Plum District has scored a high profile board addition with Raul Vazquez, the former president and CEO of Walmart.com, who has been serving on Plum’s board for the past six weeks. Megan Gardner, CEO of Plum District, says the additional money from the Series C round is being used to expand the relationship between moms and local merchants. To accomplish this, Plum District will be leveraging newly acquired technology from Chatterfly – specifically its neighborhood rewards program. You may remember Chatterfly’s launch this summer, which introduced a mobile, digital replacement for the old paper punchcard system. Via Chatterfly’s system, businesses were able to reward customers for making purchases in their stores, but also for sharing their experience on social networks like Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare and Google+. This manufactured word-of-mouth advertising system is a perfect fit for the mom-focused Plum District, which uses “District Consultants” – moms who work with local merchants on customized marketing programs for their assigned regions. Currently, all of Plum District’s deals are sourced directly by these mom/employees. Gardner says her company had been working on a mobile loyalty solution on their own, but found a great connection with Chatterfly.  Loyalty was already a big piece of Plum District’s focus as was viral sharing via social networks. In fact, Gardner notes that 75% of Plum District’s subscriber base has shared a deal via Facebook, Twitter or email. Now the company is combining its own technology with Chatterfly’s. The new system is being tested in Orange County, the East Bay area and Raleigh, N.C. But these acquisitions don’t just bring new technology to Plum District, they bring expanded markets, too. With the takeover of NY-based DoodleDeals, for example, Plum Deals is able to beef up its East Coast presence. Gardner acknowledges that DoodleDeals had a strong hold in NYC. “They got there first, we had been admiring them from afar,” Gardner admits. Currently, Plum District employs 300 mom consultants and operates in 27 markets in the U.S. (70 districts). With the acquisitions, those will remain the same, but Plum District’s presence in seven key markets will be fortified. It will also grow to 90 full-time employees and 300 “District Consultants.” In addition, the DoodleDeal acquisition means gaining access to that service’s exclusive distribution partnerships, including those with Time Out New York Kids, What to Expect and Amazon’s Diapers.com, all of which will continue with Plum Deals. PlumDistrict now has close to 1 million subscribers and has run over 10,000 deals to date. Correction: Had previously typed 10 M above. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just as consumers are adopting smartphones (to the tune of 84 million in the U.S.) and tablets at a breakneck pace, an increasing number of clinicians, healthcare administrators and staff are using mobile devices to manage patient care, communicate within the workplace, and carry out their day to day work. Nearly 80 percent of physicians will adopt smartphones by 2012. Consumers interact with and use app stores on a daily basis, and there are a growing number of consumer-facing healthtech services that offer a variety of health services, as people become more interested in using web and mobil services that help them stay in shape and get fit. So, as the centers of healthcare, and arguably with serious demand, why can’t hospitals take advantage?  Across the board, hospitals want to offer applications for their doctors and employees to use, but not all of the apps they want to offer are consumer, or even patient, focused. Hospitals and most other care facilities are enterprises, their use case doesn’t fall under healthcare categories of traditional app stores, there is a lot of sensitive and private data within their walls, so they want secure and custom deployment of their apps. This is no easy task. This is where Happtique comes in. Happtique is a mobile app store developed by healthcare professionals for hospitals and other healthcare professionals. The startup offers enterprises like hospitals, continuing care facilities, and physician practices, the ability to create individually branded and secure app stores that support apps for both patients and employees.  Happtique has previously partnered with HealthSaaS, the maker of cloud-based healthtech solutions, to create a custom catalog of mobile health apps, designed to connect patients to their healthcare organizations and physicians through their mobile phones — all via a secure network. (And AppCentral runs the backend.) The health app catalog basically offers a suite of mobile apps for patients and providers that will eventually (this is still in the works, but you can see the intended use case) allow patients to remotely monitor their health and continue treatment off-site. The solution will enable patients to upload medical documents requested by physicians into a secure portal (which healthcare organizations and hospitals can customize, i.e. it’s white label), as well as the option to integrate this into their electronic health records. The solution will be platform agnostic, which means that patients will be able to access this via the majority of their mobile devices, as well as giving both healthcare providers the ability to be more proactive in managing care and further bring patients into the center of the treatment process, rather than having treatment and care be a one-and-done process that only happens on-site. HealthSaaS provides the custom apps, while Happtique provides the ability for healthcare providers to manage and control deployment of certain apps to their patients. As part of its beta trial, Happtique has offered a number of East Coast medical institutions their own branded, private mobile app stores, including Mount Sinai Hospital, the Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Beth Israel Medical Center. Across the board, the medical institutions Happtique is working with have either developed their own mobile apps or are in the process of developing their own apps, which is reflection of where hospitals are today, said Cory Ackerman, President of Happtique. Happtique can help with development of apps, or for those hospitals and facilities that have already been creating their own, Healthcare they can then use these new, custom app stores provided by Happtique to offer apps to their patients and employees. While the intent is to be platform agnostic, initial focus has been on Android and iOS, with expansion to other mobile platforms coming in the near future.  In the broad picture, there are over 23,000 mobile health apps available for iOS and Android, but for doctors and hospital administrators, there really hasn’t been an easy way to recommend and effectively categorize apps. Happtique’s team of healthcare pros curates their app store, rating and categorizing apps in a way that’s akin to a medical library, rather than the traditional consumer-focused store. So the solution was created to both organize the mobile healthcare app library, and to make that a customizable platform so that hospitals, doctors offices, etc can each have a unified solution across their devices. While doctors may want to use some of the awesome consumer-facing health apps publicly available today, each hospital has its own legacy system and infrastructure it uses internally to push and circulate records, patient data, treatment information, and so on. They want to have all this information on their devices, as they move around the hospital, but they want that info to be private and secure within a hospital’s already existing data silos. Again, this is tough to do, especially for a platform trying to be a one-sized-fits-all solution with white label customization, but that’s where Happtique is going. And boy are we glad they are going there. These represent some big, big problems facing the healthcare industry, and as Happtique rolls out the ability for doctors and hospitals to prescribe apps to patients, let post-transplant patients, say, interact with an app that walks them through post-treatment rehab on their iPad — well, you can see the value.  Happtique is currently in the process of raising a round of venture investment. For more, check them out at home here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily One of the true giants in the tech industry is Intel. Despite the ascendance of their rival, ARM, in the mobile sector, Intel is unmatched in processor and molecular-level computing R&D. They are years ahead of others in the business and likely will be for some time. But that doesn’t mean that an occasional upstart can’t stand up to them in a small but significant way. SuVolta, a new company based in Los Gatos and only in the public eye for six months, has created an alternative to a certain Intel chip-making technique that could improve the system-on-a-chip production and significantly decrease power consumption. Their partner, Fujitsu, has just demonstrated the technology in a super-low-voltage SRAM chip, showing that the technique is very far from vaporware. It’s always extraordinary when a small company (SuVolta has around 50 employees) can take on a multi-billion dollar one, even more so when the larger company maintains its dominance by its immense spending on research staff and facilities. But SuVolta is lucky in the respect that their invention does not require such a high level of investment. Or not lucky, rather, but very shrewd. Their tech, in brief, is a new technique for producing transistors called Deeply Depleted Channel, and it’s a different material stacking method that allows for an even lower voltage to be used to reliably power the gate. In Fujistu’s demonstration, a small SRAM cell that would normally take 1V to power successfully ran with just 0.425V. Power savings of over 50% on such a low level are hugely significant. Furthermore, and perhaps most importantly, the DDC method of producing transistors is compatible with existing chip-creation infrastructures and designs. This means that SoC manufacturers won’t have to spend billions refitting their factories to create bigger dies or accommodate smaller transistor sizes; after all, reliably producing structures 25 nanometers across is no easy matter, and the machinery necessary to do it is incredibly expensive. By allowing for this huge improvement in power consumption rates but minimizing the cost of deployment, SuVolta is saving companies billions and nullifying to some extent some of the billions spent by Intel. DDC only goes so far, but it’s an extremely valuable and powerful asset for a young and small company like SuVolta to have. They’ve branded it Powershrink, but there’s no indication of when products built on the technique will hit the market. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s been a lot of buzz about social travel sites over the last year, and we seem to hear from a new one every day. Yes, social has either transformed or is in the process of transforming nearly every industry, old and new alike. Semil Shah recently penned a great round-up of the startups people are using to plan their trips, discover new place, and get recommendations from experts and friends alike. (Check it out here.) One of these startups, Tripping, is capitalizing on the success of rental/exchange marketplaces like Airbnb, and Couchsurfing to allow travelers to connect with new people and find places to stay in the destinations they visit. Tripping, which debuted at TechCrunch Disrupt in NYC last year, wants to connect travelers with locals to get the inside scoop on places they visit, share a cup of coffee with them, or even stay in their homes. It’s a great concept, but one that’s been overshadowed a bit by the success of the two sites mentioned previously. So, to supe up the site’s offerings, Tripping is today launching a discovery engine that aggregates listings from the world’s top vacation and short-term rental sites to become the Kayak of Airbnbs. (Sorry, I had to. Everyone loves a good Airbnb comparison, right?) The engine includes 500K+ listings from sites like HomeAway, Flipkey, Roomara, iStopOver, and 9flats in an effort to turn Tripping into the largest aggregator for peer-to-peer home rentals on ye olde Interwebs. What’s more, the new discovery engine enables travelers to search for people and rentals in over 15,000 cities around the world, as well as easily view map locations and property details so that users can compare listings and get a full picture of each property — all in one place. Importantly, Tripping’s engine also aggregates ratings for rentals that are listed on multiple sites, so that users can get a better sense of which sources have been used frequently and are crowd-approved. As a part of the launch of its discovery engine, the startup has also given its dashboard a facelift, including the ability to take advantage of Facebook integration so that users can see mutual friends on the site, where they’re staying, and who/what they recommend, as well as the ability for users to save their favorite listings and sites in a separate tab so they can come back to them later.  It’s functionalities like these where Tripping hopes to set itself apart from Airbnb, while at the same time capitalizing on the sudden ubiquity of peer-to-peer home and apartment sharing. The key is that Tripping allows vacationers and travelers the ability to connect and rent based on the communities they share and interests. So, if you’re a golfer or a biker, you can places to stay that are owned or operated by people who share the same interests.  It takes a little of the creepiness out of the Airbnb model and adds at least a bit of social proof and trust. It’s also more likely to make your stay in a new place more enjoyable, if you’re able to get recommendations on bike routes from people who are avid bikers themselves — and even go on rides with those people.  A search and discovery engine is a natural addition for Tripping, and makes the discoverability process much easier. It also adds to the business’ ability to become a lead generator for local businesses who want to target their ads to people who would be natural customers for their products and services. A golfer traveling to Florida is more likely to want to see an ad about local golf shops, equipment retailers, or receive discounts on greens fees at local public courses. These types of ads could be targeted, too, based on users’ search history and the communities they’re joining on Tripping. The site is also in the process of creating partnerships with the organizations that have established communities on their site, and will likely be charging fees for these communities, or at least the branded pages they establish, that would allow them to offer programs, suggestions, and recommendations for places to stay, eat, and activities for their members traveling abroad. The founders of Tripping, Jen O’Neal and Nate Weisiger were both early StubHub employees, who left after the company’s acquisition by eBay to build Tripping. The startup has made some great progress, and was backed by Quest Venture Partners, Draper Associates, and Launch Capital, which dumped $1 million in seed funding into the site back in July.  The platform is really starting to come together, and the new listings and discovery engine look great and are pretty easy to use. Check it out, and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Twitter developers have long been pining for access to historical Tweets. Right now, the best they can get is 7 days worth based on keyword search. DataSift, one of Twitter’s data partners which currently provides developers and third parties with access to the full Twitter firehose in realtime, will soon make historical Tweets accessible as well.  Developers can sign up for the Alpha of DataSift’s Historical Data starting today (the actual service will begin to roll out in the first quarter of next year).  DataSift’s Historical service will give developers, social media monitoring companies, marketers, and brands access to 60 days of tweets for the Alpha, which can be analyzed and filtered beyond simple keyword search. When the service is launched more broadly later next year, it will go back as far as two years. DataSift allows for all sorts of data analysis because it pours all the tweets into a structured database. So you can give it queries like: “Give me all the tweets that mention TechCrunch from people who do not follow @techcrunch” or “All females in the UK who mention fashion.” The company is already collecting the 1 terabyte per day of data internally—that is how much is produced by the firehose of 250 million tweets a day— with 400 terabytes total so far. “This is a real ‘big data’ engine—and that we are making it simple—we are taking advantage of map reduce—but this is our own bespoke processing engine,” says DataSift founder Nick Halstead, referring to the Hadoop technology the service is partially based on. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve been tracking Socialcam‘s foray into mobile video sharing since the app launched in March, so we have some context for the announcement today that it’s passed 3 million downloads. Basically, the app is starting to take off. It took until July to reach 1 million downloads, so around five months. Then it hit 2 million downloads near the beginning of October, or around three months. It’s taken just two months to reach the 3 million mark that it’s announcing today. Based on what chief executive Michael Seibel tells me about its latest usage patterns, I’ll go ahead and guess that it’ll take less than two months to hit 4 million downloads. The app is coming off its biggest download weekend to date, “primed” by a big download weekend over Thanksgiving, he says. It had introduced a feature to let users share videos privately a couple weeks ago, which hit the holiday right — the two biggest use cases it’s seeing are special events and families. 25% of all videos are now private, with both long-time and new users taking advantage of the feature on top of the social focus. The big results this past weekend, though, were more about doing what many of us did, which was go back to our normal lives and hang out with friends. The company’s been getting more and more pick-up for its Instagram style “filters,” too, which is also likely driving more usage and downloads. After adding filters in October, the company said 45% of users’ videos had them. Seibel tells me that 72% of videos taken have them now. More subtly, the company is also getting enough users that it’s able to show people more relevant content from friends when they first join. The median number of videos seen by new users has been steadily climbing, and is now at 7. It figures out who your friends are and what to show you by letting you sync with Facebook, Twitter and your address book. While the app is available for both iPhone (here) and Android (here), Seibel says that the vast majority of users are on the former device. The issue is what many mobile developers face — it’s hard to support all the Android versions and devices out there. The company hasn’t turned on any revenue model yet. One option is freemium, with paying users getting extra features. But Seibel’s more interested in eventually getting into advertising, mixing in relevant video content with what its users are creating in a non-invasive way. But all that’s further out. Growth is the focus for now, and based on the data available, expect more of it soon. The Justin.tv spinout is going head-to-head with other serious startups like Klip, and seems to be taking an early lead as this space evolves. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You may be familiar with Flud as the news reader app that’s trying to build an appealing alternative to Flipboard and Pulse. Flud launched iOS platform back at the end of 2010 with a heavy focus on design — and a simple user interface. Fast Company even gave Flud the 2010 Design Award of The Year. The startup has since launched its social news sharing app on Android, raised $1 million in seed from Ludlow Ventures, Scott Belsky, and Detroit Venture Partners, and is re-tooling its app for Mango, as Jordan reported last month, for release in January.  It’s been off to a great start, but to really offer a service that competes with the big boys, Flud is on a mission to build a personalized news-sharing ecosystem. Today, the startup is adding some important functionality into its app in an effort to do just that, as Flud 2.0 now allows users to create and broadcast their own news personalities. So, in addition to being a social tool for users to discover news content and select the news and information they want to follow, users can now share inside Flud to an audience based around topics or interests, creating news personalities by curating content they find from their go-to daily news sources — and receiving their own personalized Flud URL (www.flud.it/rip-empson), for example. How often do you see a headline but don’t have time to read the article and want to save it for later? Flud 2.0 offers controls for sorting and organizing news sources, allowing users to read news quickly, gather headlines into “Reading Lists”, to read later at their leisure. The Reading List button allows users to quickly bookmark articles when scanning headlines, which pop up on their profiles and can be checked out by their followers in users’ activity feeds. Pretty cool.  Flud has also added a “Share” button so that readers can push content to social networks, in conjunction with the ability to create news networks — or communities — around particular areas of interest. Through these new social capabilities, Flud users can create profiles, which become their personal front pages, compiling news that matters — essentially becoming a diary of what users are reading that can be viewed (and interacted with) by other readers.   Flud has also added support for Tumblr, allowing users to push content to their blogs for furhter discussion, adding support to Google Reader, Twitter, Facebook, and Instapaper, as well as syncing across devices so that their personal news diaries can follow them across devices, tablets, and desktops. These new iterations are an important move for Flud in moving from an app model to a platform model, as it’s one thing to build a suped up news RSS aggregator, but another to give users a dynamic platform through which they can interact, share, and converse with a community of news readers — and the content itself. With information overload and a colossal amount of content and news circulating on the Web, most readers browse through headlines looking for content they want to share. The ability for Fluders to create reading lists, use the Flud equivalent of “liking” headlines and stories which then show up in their activity feeds and can be viewed by those following their profiles, makes Flud into a news equivalent of Facebook or Twitter. Your news profile shows how many stories you’ve read, which stories you’ve “liked”, what content is in your reading list, and what readers and news sources you’re following.  It’s a great way to discover news from sources you trust, as well as give others the credit for influencing what articles you’re reading. If I read a story that you’ve Fluded, my profile will show that you were the source that allowed me to discover the article. Many of use Twitter to discover news items that people are sharing and reading in realtime, but Twitter is filled with noise and that discovery has to be serendipitous.  Flud takes the better parts of Twitter’s news discovery and gives them their own news-dedicated community, with some great added social benefits. The more you read, and the more you influence others, the higher you rise as an influencer — something you can bet Flud will continue to focus on in the future. These capabilities add a new level of discovery and curation to Flud’s service, one that should be appealing to its users and help push the service along in its mission to go beyond RSS to achieve that ecosystem feel that readers want and are coming to expect. For more on Flud 2.0, you can find the app here or at home here. http://vimeo.com/32791172 Latest headlines delivered to you daily Attention, hipsters: you can now take your poetry slams mobile. (Do hipsters still like poetry slams? I don’t know). Anyway, there’s a new iPhone app called Opuss, which describes itself as an “Instagram for words.” But to be clear, it doesn’t have to be just for poetry. It can also be used to save and share beloved quotes, jokes, recipes, reviews, stories or anything else you feel the need to write…but not tweet. Opuss is a darned pretty app, I have to admit, even though I’m not completely sold on the concept. CTO Adam Neilson says the app is meant to be sort of a grown up Twitter, but the first entry I saw upon opening the app was a bit more juvenile. For your amusement, the poem was called “Glow Worm.” Here’s how it goes: I wish I were a glow wormA glow worm’s never glum,‘Cause how can you be grumpy,when the sun shines out your bum? (credit: loz) OK. Um. Yeah. That being said, it would be nice to read some higher-quality poetry in here (sorry, loz), because the app itself looks great. I can see how it would be fun to use. After you download and install Opuss, the app briefly walks you through how to use its buttons and features. Usually, I find “walk-throughs” annoying and in the way (my philosophy: if your app needs an explainer, you need to start over), but for some reason I found myself actually reading the Opuss tutorial. You swipe through each screen as the button being described lights up at the bottom. There are even iPhone homescreen-esque dots at the bottom indicating your current page and position. A decent tutorial seems like such a simple thing, but it’s not. I’ve seen some serious disasters involving what appear to be hand-drawn circles and handwritten notes describing an app’s elements. So cheers, Opuss, on that. Using the app is pretty straightforward, too. You can view the feed, filter by category, follow others, comment, like and share. I don’t get the app’s cat theme – paw prints, collars, and kitty icons fill Opuss. (Oh, puss?) Update: Oooh, opus. Opuss. OK. Heh. And I’m not sure of the stickiness factor of an app for following and favoriting people’s words in the age of Twitter. But this app looks good, which is all the more impressive given the company’s lack of funding. Opuss is the product of Seamonster Ltd., a London-based outfit staffed by Adam Neilson, former Probability CTO, now Seamonster CTO (and Interim CEO), Technical Director and Co-founder Jeff Hodnett and Creative Director Chris Knight. You can try it for yourself from here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily GiftRocket, a graduate of this year’s Y Combinator spring class, launched behind a great idea. The startup wanted to marry gift carding with location-based services, so that friends could send gift cards to each other that could only be accessed once they “checked in” to a certain location. So, for example, if you really wanted your friend to try out the coffee at a certain local coffee shop, you could send them a gift card to that coffee joint, which they could only redeem from the shopt itself. As Robin pointed out in March, the idea was a simplified version of Venmo’s Gifi, which basically had users combine Venmo and Foursquare apps to achieve the same effect. I say “was”, because GiftRocket is today moving away from the “check in” portion of their service to an even more simplified and universal approach to sending personalized gift cards. Beginning today, GiftRocket users can send and receive digital gift cards via email or Facebook, using PayPal, a bank account transfer, or check. Basically, GiftRocket is now an easy P2P money donation service, as users can decide to send $50 to their mother for Mother’s Day, and in a personalized email say, “Mom here’s $50 for you to use at Barnes & Nobles”. GiftRocket doesn’t involve merchants directly, but GiftRocket Co-founder Kapil Kale tells me that he thinks this social pressure/proof element will assure that people use the virtualized gift cards in the way they were intended. And the best part? Their gift cards don’t expire. If you send $50 to a friend or loved one, there’s no way to be positive they use the money at the intended location (Kale said that the check-in service they originally launched became too complicated and hamstrung certain interactions), but with loved ones sending you the money, you’ll be less likely to use it for something else. But, hey, you can always just email them back and ask. GiftRocket is also launching two complementary tools (one today, one in the near future) to help beef up its service, including a feature that enables users to identify the true sale value of retailers’ physical gift cards. Obviously, depending on the merchant, gift cards are generally worth between 50 to 90 percent of their face value, the primary reason being that physical gift cards can often only be redeemed at a single, designated retailer — or they get lost or expire. (The reason why there is a strong secondary market for unused gift cards, of which there are an estimated $30 billion worth.) So the startup’s calculator will help you figure out what the value of your card is. And the second, coming soon, is GiftRocket’s VIP Concierge service, which will recommend gift ideas for senders and recipients based on their preferences (and likely Facebook history in the future). Want to know where you should send your mother-in-law for her birthday dinner? GiftRocket can help. As to how the startup is making money,it charges $1 + 5% of the gift amount. And, on that note, Kale also told us today that the startup has raised $500K in angel funding to help expand from their current team of three. GiftRocket has been boot-strapping in lean startup mode and is looking to hire, and Kale tells me that the company has been growing 70 percent month over month in terms of customers and sales. Check ’em out here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes having better data isn’t enough, even in search.  You have to present it in an intuitive way that is easy to grasp. Kevin O’Connor, the founder of FindTheBest (and before that, DoubleClick), has been working on a very hard problem: how to help people compare different products and services so that they can quickly figure out which is the best one. “How do you communicate what is better?” he asks. “How do you take a bunch of dry, mind-numbing data and communicate it back?” Today, FindTheBest is taking another major step towards that ideal with a revamp of its site design.  Instead of mind-numbing rows of data comparing everything from smartphones to ski resorts, the site is introducing more intuitive color-coded cues and a new “Smart Rating” system.  The Smart Rating is a single, normalized number between 1 and 100 (replacing the old 5-star system). It is based on a combination of expert ratings from outside sources and FindTheBest’s own quantitative rating based on factors such screen size and battery life for a smartphone, or skiable acres and vertical feet for a ski resort. They figure out which are the most authoritative sources for a given category and weight them accordingly.  So far the site is growing slowly but steadily with more than 2.5 million unique visitors per month. O’Connor is taking his time getting this right, and he’s raised $6 million from Kleiner Perkins.  “We want to tell companies what drives decisions,” he says. Already, they’ve discovered out some interesting correlations. The No. 1 filter used for picking a ski resort is not average snowfall or vertical feet, but whether or not there is a children’s ski school. And FM receivers are a big deciding factor for phones.  O’Connor wants FindTheBest to become a “big funnel for purchase intent.” People go to his site to make decisions, which is the most valuable time for advertisers and merchants to try to get in front of them. In order to get more distribution, FindTheBest is also launching badges and syndicated buyer’s guides to other sites. Below is a screenshot of what the site used to look like, and below that is a clip from a Founder Stories where O’Connor explains what he is trying to accomplish with FindTheBest.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The hottest deal in Israel is turning out to be a company whose name I first heard only a few of months ago. I can’t go to any industry networking event these days without being asked what I know about the company, which has managed to keep a low profile since its founding a couple of years ago.  Why are VCs in hot pursuit for a company they know so little about? First and foremost, because it’s playing in what is already and what will only grow as a lucrative performance marketing playing-field: Facebook.  By all accounts, the company developed an engine that does this really, really well. Second, it bootstrapped itself to $5M in annual revenues for 2011 and is expecting to nearly tripple that in 2012. Finally, it’s about to bet the entire house on a shift to a SaaS solution.  This company is Adotomi. I recently had a chance to learn more about Adotomi from CEO Joe McCormack, whom I met at the company’s offices, located in a very non-chic area of Tel-Aviv, overlooking a brothel (seriously). Adotomi’s technology was built upon the premise that in Social, advertisers are creating a demand, as opposed to Search, in which  they are fulfilling a demand (users’ search queries). In the case of the latter, a new ad campaign is initiated typically with a large amount of ads which are then funneled down to a much small quantity that are the best performing. The challenge is figuring out the best performing keywords to target against. In Social though, instead of being built upon keywords, user profiles are built upon the volunteering of demographic data (age, gender, etc.), and explicit sentiment by way of ‘Likes’ or ‘+1’s’. The challenge here is to optimize ad spend on the decypehring of the optimal demographics. The problem though is that if the pool is small and the CTR’s are high, the cost of targeting this group increases dramatically, contrary of course to what advertisers are trying to accomplish.  Adotomi’s approach is the opposite. Instead of auto-bidding on a large amount of ads, they start with a small set of ads they are fairly certain will work. They then let their engine find correlations that expand the target group. In this way, a small number of ads is expanded to thousands.  The key to this is Big Data crunching. Specifically, large data sets of user types and their behavior and engagement with ads. How did Adotomi come to own these data sets? Well, Adotomi is a Facebook Preferred Developer and were one of the first companies to get access to the social networking company’s Ads API. This means that they’re crunching historical data that very few companies are sitting on top of. Read as ‘competitive advantage’.  “Crunching billions of pieces of data,” in the words of McCormack, allows Adotomi to figure out in real-time how to expand the targeted pool of users with a high likelihood of affinity to the advertised product, at the lowest possible cost.  Granted, a very vague and high-level description of the company’s ‘secret sauce’, however, from what I’ve been able to understand from the company itself and those that have looked deeper into it, Adotomi’s platform emobdies Israeli software engineering prowess.  What is making the local VCs really salivate is Adotomi’s intent to open up the platform. While many media platforms have built enterprise solutions for agencies and large advertisers, Facebook still does not have such a system.  Adotomi thinks it can plug that hole. Evidently, investors seems think so as well and are actively vying for participation in the company’s Series A round.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cloud application services provider Iron.io has just closed a $1.4 million round of seed funding, led by Baseline Ventures, the same investors who led the seed rounds for Instagram, TaskRabbit, Heroku, Weebly and many others. Additional investors participating in this round are Ignition Partners, Cloud Capital Partners, Citrix Systems, Jonathan Siegel, Matt Ocko, Jared Kopf and Lance White. Steve Anderson, founder of Baseline Ventures, will join Iron.io’s Board of Directors. Alongside the funding announcement, Iron.io also launched its IronMQ service into public beta today. Iron.io, essentially an application infrastructure as a service provider (IaaS), makes multiple cloud application services that work across multiple platforms and clouds. One product is IronWorker (originally called SimpleWorker), a scalable task queue that allows developers to offload front-end tasks and manage their scheduled jobs and background processing. IronWorker launched in January of this year and has now executed over 10 million tasks and supports thousands of jobs per day for the company’s user base. IronMQ, now in public beta, is a flexible message queue for orchestrating data and event flow within cloud applications and between systems. This allows different parts of an app to interface and scale independently from other internal and external processes. The value of Iron.io’s products is the same for all these “as a service” companies – they allow developers to focus on building the application itself, not the plumbing. Today, most web application workers use open source solutions to build their own message and task queues, but with IronMQ and IronWorker, there’s not much setup or maintenance involved. The service also provides a real-time view into the systems through its online solution. Developers can now sign up for IronMQ as a free trial. IronWorker is already available as a beta. Pricing is usage-based with free message blocks and compute hours per month. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Now this makes a lot of sense. Groupon this morning announced its latest product, dubbed Groupon Scheduler, an online appointment service that makes it easier for both end users and merchants to go from offer to actual booking. Groupon Scheduler is based on technology from OpenCal, a Vancouver, Canada-based startup Groupon apparently – quietly – acquired in September 2011. The new product will become available to Groupon merchants and consumers in Sacramento and Miami beginning on December 7, 2011 (i.e. today) and be rolled out in other markets “soon after”. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. More about Groupon Scheduler, straight from the press release: Business owners using Groupon Scheduler can set up an appointment calendar covering all their staff, services and business locations, allowing consumers to instantly book appointments online without having to call or email.  The service can be used to take appointments for Groupon features or as a freestanding tool to manage a merchant’s entire calendar. Once they’ve purchased a Groupon deal, consumers can schedule or cancel appointments through their Groupon.com accounts. Both consumers and merchants get immediate email confirmation of each booking, as well as automated email reminders 24 hours before scheduled appointments.  Merchants also have the ability to add “Book Now” buttons on their own websites and use Groupon Scheduler to manage online bookings for all their services – not only those offered through Groupon. In other words, this marks Groupon’s entry into the online booking services market. The company is trying hard to become much more than just a pure-play, daily deals site that’s too ‘easy’ to clone.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This week we’re running a three part series by Steven Isaac, a programmer with an amazing resume including stints at Sun, Microsoft, and even a hardware start-up that brought the first (non-portable) tablets. For years he’s dreamed of an easy-to-use device with a full keyboard that slides out when needed and, together with a designer, he built the Touchfire, a fully funded Kickstarter project that has only 10 days to go before production begins. We asked him to create a series of short posts about his experience with the Kickstarter process and offer you, the hardware hackers out there, some advice and best practices. The entire series appears here. Brad and I are sitting in his office, waiting for the FedEx guy to arrive with our B39 prototype.  The fate of our company lies in the balance. FedEx comes at last, and we rip open the package. Jubilation! Not just one but several B39 keys had the required behavior. They also feel really good to type on. Is that a tear I see in Brad’s eye? He did it, TouchFire lives! Every key design we have made since descends from one of those B39 keys. Fast forward a few weeks. Apple announces the iPad 2 with the Smart Cover, and we are back in the depths of despair. Our complex retraction mechanism is clearly not in the spirit of the minimalist iPad 2. The iPad 2 launch day finally arrived. I spent the day camped out on the floor of the Bellevue Square mall, waiting for the Apple store to start selling iPad 2s. My wife Dena dropped by periodically with snacks. “At least we haven’t shipped anything yet”, I thought. “We are actually in better shape than the accessory makers who are now stuck with obsolete designs on their shelves.” The Apple store opened and I bought my allotment of iPad 2s and Smart Covers. I raced over to Brad’s office and we unpacked our prizes. Apple had once again designed a brilliant product. Magnets were used throughout the tablet and the Smart Cover. We looked at each other: “What about magnets for TouchFire?” I immediately ordered a huge assortment of magnets in various shapes and sizes, and we spent the next few weeks immersed in them. We realized that we could use the magnets in the iPad to attach and align TouchFire over the on-screen keyboard, and the magnets in the Smart Cover would allow us to store TouchFire in the Smart Cover. We also realized that TouchFire could be quickly retracted and held in position below the screen if we put magnets in all four corners. There was still a lot of work to do, but we now knew what was necessary to optimize TouchFire. Completing the new design would keep Brad busy for months. But I could see that we would ultimately succeed, so I started thinking about how we would fund the launch and initial production of TouchFire.  There were really two choices – the traditional angel/VC route, or crowd-funding via Kickstarter. I decided to pursue both in parallel, and then see which one was the better option.  We prepared for Kickstarter by making a video that included TouchFire user tests. No small undertaking, but I felt it was important for people to see TouchFire in actual use. I also approached several Silicon Valley investors that I knew from my GO days. Interestingly, none of the investors wanted to pursue TouchFire, because it was not a software project. Well, that made it easy. We’d just go with Kickstarter. I submitted our Kickstarter application on October 13th.  And heard back the next day that Kickstarter had rejected us. Time was running out. Thanksgiving and Christmas were looming, and we really needed to get launched. But I waited until our video was ready before applying again, and included a link to it. That did the trick, and TouchFire was approved shortly thereafter.  Whew! I learned that Kickstarter’s Design category is especially hard to get into. Just having a good idea doesn’t cut it anymore. Be prepared to show a live Web site, a video, previous products, or other proof that your project is real.  Now it was time to build our Kickstarter page. Before doing so, I looked at a lot of Kickstarter projects, both successful and unsuccessful. This was a good way to get a sense for what works and what doesn’t. The Kickstarter crowd is very detail oriented, and not everyone will look at your video. Make sure the key features of your project are shown on your page as well as clearly demonstrated in your video.  The trajectory of a Kickstarter project is also very interesting. All of the really successful Kickstarter projects hit the ground running from the very first day. This is not simply good luck. It is up to you to get the word out about your project before it launches, so that you will get off to a great start. Once your project has momentum, all sorts of good things start happening. Kickstarter starts to feature you. Backers feel confident that your project will succeed. The press will begin to take notice.  Brad and I let everyone we knew about our upcoming Kickstarter launch. We reunited with long-lost relatives, resolved old feuds, and talked to as many people as we could. If your project is in a niche like amateur photography, be sure to let that community know what’s coming. After we launched, I would make sure that I did something every single day to spread the word.My wife Dena became our social media czar, using Facebook and Twitter to respond whenever there is a mention of TouchFire. Keeping a standing search running on Twitter is key; that will let you know instantly that your project is being discussed somewhere in the world and will allow you to respond.  And respond you must. Besides Twitter, you will get a constant stream of messages and comments that you need to be on top of. Not to mention creating regular updates. Writing a short, sweet but meaningful update is an art form, like crafting a haiku. We are now in the final week of our Kickstarter project, and the intensity level is off the charts. Successful Kickstarter projects end with a bang, not a whimper, as people realize that they cannot put off a backing decision much longer.  Kickstarter is a mirror. Whatever you put in is immediately reflected back as signups or lack thereof, happy or unhappy backers, being noticed, or being ignored. Kickstarter is an amplifier. Your backers will unerringly point out the smallest flaws in your project, but will also get behind you en masse and be the wind beneath your wings (did I really just say that?). But most of all, building the TouchFire has been a whole lot of fun!    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at the Le Web conference in Paris, Evernote is debuting two new applications for iPhone and iPod touch devices. The first one is called Food, and is designed to help people easily save and ‘relive’ all of their favorite meals and food experiences. The second app is dubbed Hello and basically wants it easier for users to remember people after meeting them, as well as recording thoughts about and experiences with those people. Evernote Food (download link) The Food app is essentially giving users ways to document dishes and drinks they’ve had, build a catalog of custom recipes, review restaurants and record food experiences in their neighborhood or abroad, and even manage their diets. It also comes with handy sharing options, of course. The application lets people capture all aspects of a meal through pictures, location, text and photo captions. All this information about the meal is automatically synchronized with Evernote, making it easy to track down later. More information is available here.  Evernote Hello (download link) The Hello app is a tad more sophisticated. Basically, the mobile application aims to make it easier for people to remember everything about encounters, shared experiences and impressions they have when meeting other people. More information is available here. From the pitch: Evernote Hello aims to modernize the standard greeting ritual. With the app, when two people meet, they exchange phones and quickly create a basic profile. Once added to Evernote Hello, individuals are displayed within a swipeable mosaic of faces.  When tapped, a face becomes a profile that displays a history of every encounter the two people have shared, along with other people who participated in the same meetings, location information and any related content from the user’s Evernote account such as notes and photos. Sounds really cool, save for maybe the ‘exchanging phones’ thing … As with the Food app, people and encounters are automatically synched to Evernote. Both applications are available on the App Store now and free of charge. Also read: Evernote Clearly Knows How To Make Web Reading, Clipping Easier  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Your website isn’t going anywhere until you get the cloning stamp of approval. We’ve seen it happen time and time again, but I continue to be struck by how utterly unoriginal cloners are when it comes to design or branding. Behold the German, Russian and Chinese carbon copies of Pinterest, the red hot startup that just raised $27 million for its ‘self-expression engine’. Can you spot the differences between Pinterest, Pinspire.de (from master cloners the Samwer brothers), Fast Lane Ventures-backed Pinme.ru and China’s Markpic? An honorable mention goes to Myspace – we should recognize that they were definitely the pioneering Pinterest cloner. The other are basically me-too Pinterest ripoffs.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily On Wednesday, startup incubator DreamIt Ventures is graduating fourteen new companies from its Philly 2011 class. It’s the fourth program from DreamIt in Philadelphia, and the fifth graduating class for the accelerator overall. (DreamIt expanded to New York this year, too). This year’s group is notable for featuring several minority-led startups thanks to a collaboration with Comcast Ventures, the venture capital affiliate of Comcast Corporation, as part of its Minority Entrepreneur Accelerator Program (MEAP). MEAP is the first initiative from the $20 million fund created by Comcast as a part of the acquisition of NBC Universal. The fund will also be used to invest in other minority-led startups and initiatives outside of DreamIt in the future. With Comcast’s participation, DreamIt’s budget for this group was increased by $350,000. The five MEAP companies received funding from Comcast while DreamIt funded the other startups. However, all companies received the same direct funding of $5,000 per startup, plus $5,000 extra per founder (up to $25,000 total). Comcast also sponsored some of the standard costs of the accelerator on behalf of the five companies in order to assist with the necessary additional resources (more space, more desks, supplies, venue, etc.) The MEAP companies, though, had special access to Comcast resources, including PR experts, executives and others in various Comcast divisions with appropriate industry knowledge or connections. This year’s class of fourteen includes Ph.D’s and J.D.’s from Yale, Stanford and U.T. as well as dropouts from Duke, Georgetown and the Wharton School at Pennsylvania. Founders include those who have worked at Yahoo, Intel, Goldman Sachs, J.P. Morgan and Hilary for President. There are even folks hailing from as far away as Taiwan, Lebanon and Uganda. The five selected MEAP startups are ElectNext, Kwelia, MetaLayer, ThaTrunk and Qwite, whose owners are African-American, Asian, Hispanic and Indian. (Full descriptions are below). And now, the graduating class: Cloudmine  CloudMine is a platform that provides a set of RESTful APIs for mobile app developers, allowing them to quickly create back-end solutions for their apps. Specifically, the startup is offering schema-free data structure storage, user account creation and management, and server-side business logic for computations that are too complex or data-intensive to run on a mobile device. Cloudmine launched into beta in October. ClrTouch  ClrTouch allows publishers, agencies and ad networks to create, traffic, serve and track “touch-driven” rich media advertising on tablets. By leveraging the ClrTouch advertising technology, publishers and ad networks can drive a higher CPM by offering premium ad formats tailored for tablet web browsers. The ClrTouch ad server and ad builder are currently in development. ElectNext ElectNext is like an eHarmony for voters as it matches voters with the political candidates who best reflect their values. The site has you rank the issues and answer quizes in order to match your beliefs to specific candidates in the current election. ElectNext launched in November. Flirq Flirq is an early-stage startup that wants to shift the perception of online dating from “sketchy and creepy” to “fun and flirty.” To do so, it puts women strictly in control of their privacy while offering them the support of their friends when looking for a date. Guys, however, must win over the girl in order to “unlock” her full profile and to interact freely (ah, the thrill of the chase!). Grassroots Unwired Grassroots Unwired is offering the direct sales industry an integrated SaaS platform that combines a mapping system, mobile application and web portal that run in conjunction with a GPS-enabled mobile device for tracking, reporting and analytics – all in real-time. Clients can use the tools to plan, execute, and analyze their person-to-person campaigns. In the first vertical it went after – political campaigns – the startup generated $300,000 in revenue (to-date) and has retained 100% of its customers. The company is now adding new customers in anticipation of the 2012 election cycle and is in talks with some of the largest direct sales companies and non-profits in the country. Kwelia Kwelia is a new service for landlords or those managing apartment complexes which compiles a database of rental real estate market data, and uses a proprietary model to crunch the numbers. The result is real-time and user-friendly analysis on critical market assumptions. Renters can also use the service to determine the current market value of an apartment. Metalayer MetaLayer wants to fight information overload and make sense out of big data by improving how people analyze images and text. Its products take streams of text or images and add structured, relational, temporal, and geospatial metadata. Users can visually summarize information and prioritize relevant content with the service’s Dashboard. OneAway  OneAway shows you where your friends and your friends-of-friends like to hang out on “heatmap” of your city.  It also displays those who are nearby and allows you to start chatting with them. Qwite Qwite is a customer feedback service that works over mobile. It helps businesses deliver content to nearby smartphones, including customer surveys, incentives and other content that enhances the business’ brand. Businesses can use Qwite to increase customer retention rates, reward loyal customers and manage other customer-facing aspects of their business. SnipSnap SnipSnap is the first mobile app that allows anyone to clip a printed coupon onto their smartphone. Users just snap a picture of the offer (whether from a free-standing insert, direct-mail piece, newspaper, etc.) and the app recognizes all the printed text, images, and barcodes. Once scanned, a user can redeem the coupon, as well as receive expiration-date notifications and in-store reminders. Spling Spling is a new service for sharing and discovering links. Users can share any link with anyone, while also creating an online repository where they can store and index their favorites. Spling launched this week, backed by a $400K Series A. SupplyHog SupplyHog wants to bring the construction industry online by providing contractors, project owners, and building suppliers a one-stop-shop to manage projects and list, quote, and purchase building materials. ThaTrunk ThaTrunk is a mobile app that uses your location to distribute multimedia files with the push of a button. The app creates a “dynamic proximity network” which grows and shrinks with the number of other ThaTrunk mobile app users near you. Creative publishers, like authors, speakers, musicians and more, can use ThaTrunk at expos, conferences and concerts to reach their audience. Files are distributed from the cloud to nearby users who can then view them and share them on Facebook and Twitter. UXFlip UX Flip is focused on developing a better mobile app experience. The company is building two products: FeedbackTrail, a market-ready tool for developers to communicate in-app with their users, and a platform for direct UI management. Developers will be able to personalize, customize, and perform multivariate testing on their apps without having to re-release them through the app store. Correction: Can’t count. There are 14 startups, not 15. Actually, there used to be 15 startups. The missing team dropped out and is in another accelerator in Silicon Valley. See the announcement here to find one which one. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Bootstrapped Polish startup UXPin is about to revolutionize the user experience design process. Typically, building a project requires a steady hand, paper and pencil prototyping, and then a redundant, painstaking manual conversion of offline designs into digital wireframes. It’s slow and hinders startups from rapid iteration. But with today’s launch of UXPin’s new web app and design pads, you can arrange sticky notes of popular design elements, take a photo, and a perfectly aligned, fully editable digital wireframe is created for you. Users can then can share their UXPin project with teammates, simultaneously chat and modify the design on UXPin’s monthly subscription site, and export their product as HTML. UXPin has the potential to ease entry into UX design for novices, significantly streamline the process for experts, and become a powerful player in the wireframing and mockup tool space.  UXPin launched the first version of its design pads last year, but they were strictly for offline use with no way to convert them to digital wireframes. Still, they made a splash and the company broke even within a couple of days thanks to customers from Google, Myspace, and Salesforce. Now I’m holding their new, digital conversion-ready pads for web, iPhone, and Android design and they feel great. Solid, hardbound, with tons of sticky elements, strong glue, and instructions for use printed inside. The pads cost $30 each, and a subscription to the online wireframe editor is $7 a month after the 2-week free trial. I’ve never done serious design prototyping and it was quick and intuitive to build the design of an app. Thanks to tiny symbols on the sticky notes, UXPin’s site recognizes the placement of the elements from an iPhone photo I shot of my creation. It then set up a wireframe I could move, resize, color, and augment with additional elements or images. There’s still some kinks in the flow of adding an uploaded wireframe to a new project and editing the elements from one’s offline prototype, but UXPin’s CEO Marcin Treder tells me it’s addressing them. UXPin is the first product that automatically turns paper prototypes into wireframes, and it could seriously disrupt the established UX tool companies like Balsamiq and Axure. Treder is actually a full-time UX man that uses Axure every day and he says it is poorly designed, overly complicated, and doesn’t properly support documentation or collaboration. Treder tells me “I think UXPin has a great chance to get popular among startup founders that need to create ideas very quickly and collaborate with their team.” Though bootstrapped to date, the company isn’t opposed to taking funding, and I think a seed round to propel product development and grow the 5-person team would be a wise investment. UXPin offers a cheap, innovative product that drastically reduces busywork and increases output for designers. Currently, Balsamiq says 30,000 pay for its service, and Axure counts some of the biggest design companies in the world as customers. However, I wouldn’t be surprised to see some of them toss out their pencils and graph paper, ditch their uncollaborative wireframe editors, and switch to UXPin. Watch the company’s demo video to see exactly how it works, and the first 5 people to reply with their email address to my “Contest” comment on this post will get a free team license (Update: All 5 have been given away).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Lots of US cities claim they’re the best place to do a startup. So where are entrepreneurs actually starting companies these days? TechCrunch reader Yuval Baror took a look at CrunchBase to try to answer the question. His most surprising result is that New York has been getting quite a few more startups than other cities outside of Silicon Valley. There is something to all the hype being cooked up by New York media companies and politicians, apparently. Of course, the San Francisco-Silicon Valley region is still the clear leader. Here are the results. I’ll follow with some discussion of the methodology, and explain why you shouldn’t read too much into the numbers. Over the last two years, CrunchBase indicated that 46 companies were founded in Silicon Valley, followed by 24 in New York, and 11 apiece in Boston and Los Angeles.  If you include all of 2008, the number rises dramatically, with Silicon Valley increasing its lead.  And that trend continues if you remove any limitation on the time of founding. Beyond the unsurprising Silicon Valley numbers, New York still comes in way ahead of all of the other cities.  But hold on. Don’t all these numbers look ridiculously low since CrunchBase lists almost 80,000 companies? Yes. Many companies don’t provide their founding information, or headquarter locations, so they won’t show up correctly here. However, this missing data is presumably a trend that’s consistent across all companies everywhere. It’s possible that Silicon Valley companies are more likely to self-identify as Silicon Valley companies, for example, but we don’t have any evidence either way. What about any inherent biases in CrunchBase? TechCrunch is based in Silicon Valley  and has historically focused on local companies, so it’s quite likely that Silicon Valley companies overrepresented. (Want to change these results, entrepreneurs? Go rep your cities on CrunchBase.] More broadly, a startup can mean a lot of different things to different people. Self-identifying as a small business versus a startup obviously skews the results here.  TechCrunch is itself a good example: Michael Arrington started it as a side blog, and he didn’t think about it as his main business until it was taking off. A new Mexican restaurant in Omaha might not look like a startup now, but maybe it’ll become a chain one day. Another wrinkle in the methodology is that Baror queried all companies located within 10 miles of a given city to try to capture the relevant suburbs. But he expanded that to 50 miles for San Francisco to capture Silicon Valley. And then, of course, there’s the international question. How do Beijing and London and everyone else stack up? If you feel like running the numbers before I get to it, send over the results and I’ll write them up. You can reach me at my increasingly spammed email account, eldon (at) techcrunch (dot) com. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile dining apps for foodies on the go, LocalEats and BiteHunter, are today announcing a new content-sharing partnership. Starting now, LocalEats’ users looking for a dining deal will see information from BiteHunter’s deals database, while BiteHunter’s users will see a restaurant synopsis provided by LocalEats. Since both apps are operating in the same space, but are not direct competitors, this type of partnership makes sense. Maybe more app developers should do the same? In the updated applications, you can see a “powered by BiteHunter” banner in LocalEats deals sections and, in BiteHunter, LocalEats is listed among other dining resources, including Yelp. The partnership should help these relative newcomers to the mobile dining space, who don’t have the brand name recognition of a Zagart or Urbanspoon. But it has a secondary benefit too: it helps to introduce an app’s users to another app they may also like. You often see app cross-promotion through mobile ads and other app monetization and distribution deals, but you don’t as regularly see app promotions through content sharing deals. But such initiatives should be more common – apps aren’t a zero sum game. Users can (and do) install multiple apps that serve similar purposes. Within the over-crowded photo app community, for example, some developers recently began participating in app cross promotion through the PhotoAppLink initiative, which lets users export photo edits between apps directly, without having to save first to the camera roll. Even though, like BiteHunter and DealHunter, all the participants are after the same type user (in this case, photo editors, not foodies), the idea is that working together may have more of an advantage than independent marketing efforts alone would have had. So, more of this please, app developers! And even better, let users tap on an app’s icon from within your app to open another app directly. And then tap again to go back. It’s not like it can’t be done…remember? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes you want to go out, but aren’t sure what’s going on in your city that would interest you. SeatGeek, the ticket search engine for live events, is launching an event discovery engine today called Columbus that helps you find concerts, sporting events, and live shows in your area. It is a “Pandora for live events” says SeatGeek co-founder Jack Groetzinger. You train Columbus by telling it 4 or 5 bands and sports teams you like then it produces a calendar of events filled with its recommendations.  It is all tied to upcoming events in SeatGeek’s database, so the calendar keeps updating all the time. You can buy tickets as well. If it shows you something you don’t like, you can tell it and it won’t show you the same performer or sports team again. The recommendations get better over time as the algorithm learns more about your preferences. SeatGeek developed its own recommendation algorithm using its data, along with data from Hunch and Last.fm. (This is exactly the kind of app Hunch was hoping to support with its Taste Graph API before it was bought by eBay). For people who sign in with Facebook Connect, it learns your preferences from your Facebook profile as well. It also shows you events your friends are going to on the calendar. SeatGeek is a search engine for tickets, so people really only go there occasionally when they already know what they want to do. Groetzinger hopes that Columbus will get them coming more often to discover new events (and then buy the tickets from SeatGeek). Discovery and commerce go hand in hand, so the better that SeatGeek’s recommendations are, the more tickets it should sell.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This week we’re running a three part series by Steven Isaac, a programmer with an amazing resume including stints at Sun, Microsoft, and even a hardware start-up that brought the first (non-portable) tablets. For years he’s dreamed of an easy-to-use device with a full keyboard that slides out when needed and, together with a designer, he built the Touchfire, a fully funded Kickstarter project that has only 10 days to go before production begins. We asked him to create a series of short posts about his experience with the Kickstarter process and offer you, the hardware hackers out there, some advice and best practices. Read part one here. The entire series will appear here. I knew what I wanted – a soft, rollable keyboard for tablets – but I didn’t have an inkling how to get my keyboard idea made. That’s when I met Brad. Brad is both a mechanical engineer and an industrial designer, a rare but extremely useful combination. He started his career at HP, and then went to the legendary design firm IDEO. In a strange twist of fate, Brad had done the mechanical design of the EO tablet while at IDEO. But our paths never crossed.  He went on to design everything from toothbrushes to Cray supercomputers, plus a wide assortment of mobile and digital camera accessories. He was now running his own design consultancy, and seemed perfect for the job. Brad was confident that he could wrap up my project in short order; he had designed keyboards before. He proposed using silicone as the material, and designed the first version of TouchFire in a few weeks, using a traditional key design for a rubber keyboard.  Keyboard B1, as we called it, was a failure. No matter how hard you pushed on a key it wouldn’t actuate. My hacked together prototype worked better. It became clear that designing an all-silicone keyboard overlay that allowed users to rest their fingers on home row that was also easy to type on, was not going to be a snap. It would require fundamentally re-inventing how the tactile aspects of the keyboard worked. And we hadn’t even begun to figure out how to make it magically disappear at the user’s command. But that was OK. Every significant project I’d ever worked on reached a point of hopeless despair somewhere along the line. It was time to make failure our friend.  I challenged Brad to design a keyboard overlay that worked better than my prototype. 19 attempts later, keyboard B20 finally achieved that goal. It still didn’t allow users to rest their fingers on the home row, but the typing experience had significantly improved.  We brainstormed a dozen ways to quickly get the keyboard overlay out of the way, and settled on a mechanism that retracted the overlay when the user pulled a lever. We would build this into an iPad case.  Now we were cooking! I decided to spin up a separate company for TouchFire, and offered Brad an equity co-founder role. This meant that he would no longer be paid as a consultant. It was a big decision that he struggled with, and then agreed. We were off and running; what could possibly go wrong? We found out a few months later. We were up to revision B38 by this time, and we still hadn’t cracked the puzzle of the home row rest keys. The way we were going was looking more and more like a dead-end. Meanwhile, the magic retraction mechanism was getting more and more complex, starting to resemble the rigging of a 16th century sailing ship.  We had to make a bold move. Brad proposed building a keyboard prototype where each individual key was a completely new design. We would try every crazy idea we could think of, and if none of them worked, TouchFire was toast. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Audiosocket, the Music-as-a-Service platform provider, is today launching its own Music-as-a-Service Storefront. (Yep, in acronym lingo, that’s a “MaaS.”) The company already powers the backend of the Vimeo’s Music Store, allowing for the integration of appropriately licensed tunes into online videos. Now, with the new hosted service, Audiosocket aims to connect indie musicians and digital media companies, including launch partners IndieFlix, The National Festival for Talented Youth (NFFTY) and a new e-learning company LearnCreate. The MaaS Storefront will offer AudioSocket’s catalog of over 33,000 pre-cleared songs from emerging artists in need of discovery and distribution to others in content creation communities, specifically those who are also focused on supporting indie artists themselves. (Well, those are the most likely partners for this service, that is.) The Storefront will be provided as white label offering which partners can customize, brand, and have up in running within 24 hours. For example, IndieFlix, which likes to call itself the “Netflix for indie films,” says it gets a lot of submissions where the music hasn’t been properly licensed. Until now, it has had to spend its own time and money to resolve these problems, the company reports. With the Audiosocket Storefront, though, IndieFlix will be able to simplify this process. With the IndieFlix Storefront, available here, filmmakers can now browse and search for music by genre, mood, tempo, vocal, themes or instruments. This isn’t the first deployment for Audiosocket’s “MaaS” – Vimeo’s Music Store was. But where that was a custom integration designed just for the Vimeo website, you can think of this one as “Vimeo Lite.” Instead of a full-on integration, this is a hosted product, a plug-and-play music storefront that anyone could use. More details on the Audiosocket Storefront will be available from the company website: audiosocket.com. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Dropost.it is a clever little service that allows you to drop gifts for friends which are geo-tagged to specific locations. These gifts, which you can think of as virtual gift cards purchased via the Dropost.it service, can only be accessed when the recipient visits a specific location. Initially, the service works over PayPal, but the company is working towards deeper integration with mobile wallets, including NFC-based wallet systems, like Google Wallet. Beyond facilitating the gift-giving process, Dropost.it is also working on a feature that will help you figure out what gifts to buy your friends (this piece hasn’t yet launched). To do so, Dropost.it will pull in data from Facebook, including friends’ likes and interests, but it will also work with social data from Foursquare and Twitter in the future. (And yes, haters, you will need a Facebook account to log in today). The idea is that you’ll be able to use the service to figure out what places your friends typically visit – that is, the restaurants, bars, coffee shops, retail stores, etc. that they favorite. This is especially helpful when you’re buying for acquaintances whose personal interests you may not know too well, or when you’re buying for friends who live out of town.  After the gift is purchased (with a small fee), the recipient is emailed a message that includes an optional video greeting from the gift-giver, for a more personalized experience. The email also includes a link to download the accompanying Dropost.it mobile application (HTML5 first, then iOS and Android). To claim the gifted funds, the recipient just launches the app upon arrival at the given venue. As a service that works over PayPal, of course, this isn’t ideal, since the money isn’t instantly available in the recipient’s bank account unless they use the PayPal Debit Card. But further down the road, when mobile wallet usage is more prevalent, something like Dropost.it could be a useful way to surprise friends with instant gifts that are available immediately. In addition to the consumer-facing angle, merchants can also participate in Dropost.it to set up their own promotions (aka “drops”) wherever they choose. They could allocate $1,000 in $5 increments to encourage foot traffic, for example, or they could use a series of drops to create a scavenger hunt-style game. While the idea of a geo-tagged gifting platform may be a bit ahead of its time, the idea of parsing friends’ social networking profiles for recommendations is right on schedule. Even the world’s largest retailer, Walmart, is just now figuring out how to use Facebook profile data to personalize offers to individual consumers. With Dropost.it’s insights into your friends real-world behavior, you have a better shot at something they’d actually like than you do when standing at the large, impersonal gift card aisle at the drug store. Even though geo-tagged gifts are a neat trick, it’s these social recommendations (when launched) that may end up being the service’s killer feature. Dropost.it, however, doesn’t have the resources of a Walmart behind it, just a bit of  seed funding from Tampa’s TechStars Network member, Gazelle Lab, and two high-energy founders Orrett Davis and  Ty Mathen. Prior to today’s launch, Dropost.it lined up Bob Schwartz, President of Magento and Jim Bennette, CEO of VisiStat, as advisors along with a local business leader, Tampa Bay’s John Walsh, President of Walsh Solutions. Update: we were told Schwartz was advising by the company. He says he is not.  The Dropost.it site went live this morning. Considering the startup’s early stage, here’s hoping it stay up-and-running. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s no secret that Peter Thiel thinks that the next big bubble facing our economy is not inflating the housing or tech markets, but that of higher education. The former PayPal CEO and early backer of Facebook is well-known for his contrarian views and has more than once publicly criticized higher education for being an overhyped and bloated industry. The entrepreneur-turned-investor has been on a mission to find alternative (and better) ways to motivate, foster, and support young people who want to make a difference. In May, Thiel, along with his Foundation, put their money where their mouth is, announcing the “20 Under 20 Thiel Fellowship”, a program that offers talented independent thinkers under the age of 20 $100,000 and two years free of school to pursue their entrepreneurial endeavors. The program launched with 24 Thiel Fellows, each of these wiz kids pursuing their own inspiring scientific and technical projects. (You can meet the class here.) Originally, the Thiel Foundation planned to award only twenty fellowships, but James O’Neill, who heads the Thiel Foundation, said there were so many outstanding candidates among the 400 applications they received that they were compelled to add four more spots.   Six months into the program, and already the progress has been impressive. O’Neill tells us that more than ten of the Fellows have founded companies, and at least one has already launched a product on the market. The progress of the program has been so good, in fact, that the Thiel Foundation has decided to launch a second class in 2012. The program is now accepting applications, with a deadline of December 31st. Candidates must be under 20 years of age until that date.  In preparation for next year’s class, O’Neill also peeled back the curtain a bit more on how the current class of young innovators have been faring in their first year. Andrew Hsu, who founded a company called Airy Labs (after dropping out of Stanford University as a fourth-year neuroscience Ph.D. candidate — at the age of 19) to build the next generation of social learning games for kids, launched with $1.5 million in venture funding. The round led by Foundation Capital with participation from Google Ventures, Rick Thompson, as well as other prominent angel investors and micro-cap venture capital firms. Eden Full, who founded Roseicollis Technologies to take her solar panel tracking invention called the SunSaluter to developing communities, won the Staples-Ashoka Youth Social Entrepreneurship award, snagging $300K from the Postcode Green Challenge for her contributions to the solar industry. Dale Stephens recently signed a deal with Penguin Press to publish his forthcoming book, Hacking Your Education. And today, The Fellowship announced that Grand Challenges Explorations, an initiative that enables researchers to test unorthodox ideas that address persistent health and development challenges (created by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation) has rewarded Thiel Fellow Darren Zhu with a $100,000 grant. Zhu founded Synbiosys, LLC, a synthetic biology company focused on building foundational tools to make biological systems easier to engineer and to commercialize their downstream applications. Specifically, Zhu and Synbiosys will be pursuing a global research project that aims to produce a low-cost diagnostic platform to diagnose Leishmaniasis, an understudied infectious disease that affects over 14 million people.  According to the Foundation, current diagnosis of the disease relies on expensive and invasive screening techniques, so Synbiosys is using synthetic biology to build a more rapid, inexpensive, and sensitive diagnostic tool that can be extended to diagnose other infectious diseases as well. The early success of these impressive youngsters is certainly inspiring, and O’Neill said that he thinks the Fellows can become exemplars for other intelligent young people looking to get involved in technology. That’s why, he says, that the Thiel Fellowship makes picks participants based on who they are as people, rather than the particular project they’re pursuing. The program encourages Fellows to iterate and change course during their two years. And they’re getting some serious guidance along the way. O’Neill says that they organize a retreat every quarter, in which they bring in experts to give talks and seminars on topics including IP tax, how to hire and motivate employees, develop products, pitch investors, and so on. Fellows also have the benefit of three “handpicked” mentors, chosen by the Thiel Foundation based on their interests. It’s an awesome program for up-and-coming entrepreneurs and, with the way it’s being structured, O’Neill says that they’ve been surprised to find that the criticism from higher education has been a lot milder than they expected. Some professors and teachers are even encouraging their students to stop out and apply. What’s more, “anyone under 20 is eligible” to apply. Lucky kids. Latest headlines delivered to you daily ZINK (short for ‘zero ink’) this morning announced that it has scored $35 million in Series B funding in a round led by Genii Capital. The company also announced the hiring of former board members Mary Jeffries (as chairman and co-CEO) and Ira Parker (as president and co-CEO). Jeffries was once the CEO of Polaroid, where Parker also served as VP and General Counsel before moving on to a similar role at AOL. ZINK is behind the ‘Zero Ink Printing Technology’ and its sibling, ZINK Paper, with which the company aims to ruffle some established feathers in the global printing industry. The company has invented technology and a full-color printing system that essentially eradicates the need for ink cartridges or ribbons when used with its proprietary ZINK Paper. I’m not sure how they pull this off, exactly, but the company pitches its technology thusly: Based on advances in chemistry, engineering, physics, image science, and manufacturing, the development of ZINK has generated an IP portfolio that includes over 180 patents and patents pending.  At the heart of the technology is ZINK Paper which looks like regular white photo paper before printing. Heat from a ZINK-enabled device activates the color-forming chemistry within the ZINK Paper, forming all the colors of the rainbow. ZINK’s technology already powers a limited range of home photo printers, digital cameras with built-in ZINK printers, as well as logging printers, with more coming. Partners include Dell and Polaroid. Founded in 2005, ZINK’s R&D labs and headquarters are based in Bedford, Massachusetts, with a manufacturing plant located in Whitsett, North Carolina. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in May, BlueStacks, the startup that has developed software to let Android users run their apps on all Windows PC, tablets, and laptops, raised a $7.6 million series A, pre-launch. In October, the startup followed up with a $6.4 million series B from AMD, Citrix Systems, with participation from existing investors like Andreessen Horowitz, Ignition Ventures, and more.  Its series B round followed closely on the heels of the alpha launch of its App Player for Windows, which is basically a free software download that will give users one-click access to Android apps on any Windows PC, tablet, or laptop. (And the ability to view these apps in full-screen.) Complementing the App Player, BlueStacks also released “Cloud Connect”, a cloud-based service that allows PCs to become a veritable extension of any Android-based mobile device — and vice versa.  While $14 million in funding seemed a bit bubble-ish for a startup with an alpha product (especially considering half of the investment was raised prior to to launch), we’ve learned from BlueStacks that the early adoption has been significant. Since launching six weeks ago, the startup’s App Player has been downloaded over half a million times, 550K+, to be more precise.  Of course startups are happy for all of us to fawn over vanity metrics, but the BlueStacks team did admit that this early adoption caught it by surprise. Especially the extent to which downloads are taking place outside of the U.S. The Americas account for 32 percent of the App Player’s downloads, with Europe and Asia both seeing over 31 percent of downloads as well. The startup recently expanded to support XP and Vista a couple weeks ago, as many Chinese users are still using XP, for example. The App Player launched in October with several “app partners” pre-loaded, including Bloomberg, LivingSocial and Drag Racing. And we here more are on their way. In conjunction, there are over 250,000 apps available on BlueStacks’ Cloud Connect mobile app, which allows users to push apps from their phone into the startup’s player.  The early signs show that this is definitely a startup to watch, but chime in to tell us what you think. Is this a valuable technology?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily MarkaVIP, an ecommerce company that operates an eponymous private sales club in the Middle East, has landed $5 million in Series A funding led by Lumia Capital with participation from NYC-based Invus Financial Advisors. The capital will be used to boost sales and marketing efforts and to support regional expansion throughout the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC). MarkaVIP was founded in Jordan by CEO Ahmed Alkhatib and CTO Amer Abulaila in November 2010. Early investors include former Yahoo VP Usama Fayyad and former US ambassador Karim Kawar, along with Hummingbird Ventures and Turkish serial entrepreneur Çağlar Erol. MarkaVIP, which has adapted the flash sales model popularized by companies like Vente Privée and Gilt, has attracted 700,000 registered users to date, with up to 5,000 more joining per day. MarkaVIP is currently available in the GCC, Jordan and Lebanon and employs 120 people across six offices in Beirut, Dubai, Amman, Istanbul, Antwerp and San Francisco. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in 2007, there were a host of companies (at various stages of development) attempting to capitalize on the growing social revolution by making it easy for people to launch their own social networks. (You can read our coverage of a few of these companies here.) One of these companies was GoingOn, which at the time of this early coverage was a “network of networks”, partnering with media companies (among others), allowing them to integrate social networks into their existing websites, a la the KickApps of old.  Fast forward to 2011, and you’ll find that GoingOn has gone academic. What does that mean? The startup has added on to its original Drupal-based, open source software solution to become an on-demand platform for academic institutions which allows them to build their own private social networks. Essentially, GoingOn wants students and faculty to be able to connect, collaborate, and learn more easily by providing self-service collaboration tools, with Facebook-style messaging, so that schools can share resources and keep students up to date about activities happening on campus. The key for GoingOn is that its solution allows campuses to easily integrate the platform with their existing learning management (LMS) and student information systems (SIS), customizing their new social network to meet their individual needs. The virtual social network then allows campuses to create online communities like social classrooms, student study groups, and faculty committees, as well as (leveraging Drupal’s CMS tools) an easy way to publish content to individuals, groups, and communities within the network, aggregate feeds from existing LMS and SIS systems — and students can set up academic profiles, portfolios, and aggregate their classes. The ambitious and far-reaching goal for GoingOn, CEO Jon Corshen tells us, is a large-scale platform play: To create a fundamentally new piece of the academic technology ecosystem, one that sits between and ties together LMS, SIS, and the Portal. Schools know that portals aren’t working for them anymore, most students don’t use them, but these institutions want to find ways to keep them engaged and active — to tell them what’s going on. In the beginning, Corshen said, colleges and universities believed Facebook would be the answer, but it’s become clear that students and faculty want to separate their academic and social lives. While LMSes like Blackboard, Pearson, and Desire2Learn are said to be the answer to this, most students know that these solutions aren’t particularly appealing, and they’re built around a closed, course-centric model.  GoingOn wants to go beyond the course (and student-teacher) model, focusing on the broader academic life experience and sharing at a deeper and more integrated level. Schools today are moving to a blending and distance learning model, with students taking courses online, from all over the world, and faculties are relying more heavily on adjunct professors. So, as the mission of GoingOn is to help students, and faculty, to more effectively connect, collaborate and learn outside the context of the course, combining new models of communication with deeper analysis and recommendations can lead to more meaningful ways for students and faculty to do this.  To build these richer forms of communication, GoingOn has hired Taneli Otala as CTO. Otala is formerly CTO of Atomic Labs, MySQL AB, SenSage, Verano, and held senior positions at Oracle and many others. Since joining the startup, the open source expert has integrated technologies like Drupal, Hadoop, Cassandra, Manhout, Scale, Lift, Apache Camel, Hive, PIG, and ZooKeeper in an attempt to take GoingOn from a social learning and community management platform to a stream-based academic engagement network. When I asked Otala what he envisions as both the future of GoingOn as well as the edtech landscape going forward, he had a very interesting (if somewhat technical) response:  The real future is in stream analysis and recommendations. On a simple level, these new academic systems need to be smart enough to know, for example, that a post about a guest lecturer in child psychology should be routed to anyone that is a psychology major (based on explicit profile fields) or by understanding what types of communities they are members of (implicit).  But to make them truly amazing, we want to get down to the semantic level to build a ‘knowledge cloud’ around people to understand what they are experts in or interested in — based on the content they are contributing (and its rating/usage) and interacting with. Whether you are a student looking for a math tutor or a top researcher looking for help in a cross-disciplinary field, networks should help you to find resources — not through generic search — but by understanding the knowledge graph in the network. Start as one school and imagine expanding across schools. This is the true future of open education resources — not simply just posting free content into a common database. For better or for worse, GoingOn is playing on a big scale, with stream-based architecture and “modern” technologies that tend to scare the bajeesus out of academic institutions and their legacy frameworks. The academic market is challenging to say the least, especially for a software (SaaS) provider. They have an interesting concept, but it may just be too hard of a sell to really take off. That being said, the “social platform for academic life” is now serving more than twenty-five institutions, with more to come. As to price? The company operates on a subscription model, with monthly subscriptions running from $1K and up based on the number of active users. The startup was angel-funded until it raised $7 million from Granite Ventures, Omidyar Networks, California Technology Ventures and Armada Ventures earlier this year. For more, check out GoingOn at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve talked about OpenDNS quite a bit over the years, noting that these guys know what geeks like: free, fast DNS lookups that smooth out the Internet’s rough edges and shave seconds off of many web tasks. Now OpenDNS is offering DNSCrypt, a service that completely encrypts your DNS sessions, ensuring that evil ha><0rZ can't see where you're headed on the web. The service also prevents man-in-the-middle DNS attacks. The service also automatically enables OpenDNS on your machine, thereby killing multiple birds with one multi-megabyte OS extension. What does it do? Basically DNSCrypt wraps your DNS conversation in an SSL wrapper. Considering most DNS sessions are plaintext, this a huge deal. They've even made the source code available for free here so that independent security experts can test their claims.  From the website: In the same way the SSL turns HTTP web traffic into HTTPS encrypted Web traffic, DNSCrypt turns regular DNS traffic into encrypted DNS traffic that is secure from eavesdropping and man-in-the-middle attacks.  It doesn’t require any changes to domain names or how they work, it simply provides a method for securely encrypting communication between our customers and our DNS servers in our data centers.  We know that claims alone don’t work in the security world, however, so we’ve opened up the source to our DNSCrypt code base and it’s available on GitHub (ed: not yet posted). DNSCrypt has the potential to be the most impactful advancement in Internet security since SSL, significantly improving every single Internet user’s online security and privacy. The system has automatic failover to an unsecured state and can prevent folks from snooping on your DNS calls in a coffee shop or unsecured cyber cafe. Sadly, it’s not a full proxy so it won’t hide your browsing habits from local censors. It’s available now for the Mac, and Linux/Windows versions are forthcoming.  Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, Erick wrote about the dramatic increase in startups and early-stage businesses we’ve been seeing over the last few years, likening the phenomenon to the Cambrian Explosion. In these fertile times for startups, naturally, there’s plenty of funding to be had: In the last year,  according to CrunchBase, there were more than 1,100 seed/angel funding rounds, up from 855 in 2008. There are fewer barriers to startup creation now than ever before, and as businesses pop up left and right, so have the incubators and accelerators that provide these companies with the early fuel they need to build their products. Y Combinator, one of the more well-known startup incubators in the world, is now receiving over one application every minute, for example, and recently expanded the size of its classes to keep pace with demand. Each of the prominent incubators, Y Combinator, TechStars, 500 Startups, and Founder Institute, among them, have been expanding their programs and networks, both at home and overseas. TechStars has added hubs in a number of cities, and both 500 Startups and Y Combinator recently launched their “largest batches yet”. It seems that with each passing “semester”, enrollment continues to grow. But which of these incubators is the largest? It depends on how you define “largest” — each of these incubators rock and each has its own case. But one in particular thinks it has the “biggest” case: Founder Institute, today announced that it has become the largest incubator in the world — at least in terms of the number of alumni, mentors, and locations.  Founder Adeo Ressi told us that the incubator has now helped launch 415 startups worldwide, with a total of 483 graduated entrepreneurs. Founder Institute has done so in less than 2.5 years, and Ressi says that, when the ten operating sessions graduate in the next two months, the Institute will exceed 500 companies launched and is on pace to launch an average of two tech companies per day in 2012. The Founder attributes the incubator’s growth to, among other things, focusing not on bringing startups to Silicon Valley, but on building startup ecosystems in national and international markets, allowing entrepreneurs to create their businesses at home. The Institute is directly operating in 20 different locations and counts over 700 mentors among its flock. Of course, while Founder Institute may be the largest in terms of scale and alumni (Y Combinator has graduated 317+ companies, TechStars 114, 500 Startups 174, and Plug and Play 300+), it does not hold claim to being the largest in terms of the number of exits that generated cash returns or the amount of money raised.  The top 21 companies incubated by Y Combinator, for example, have a combined value of $4.7 billion, said Founder Paul Graham. Comparatively, 41 percent of Founder Institute graduates have received funding, for a total of more than $30 million. Founder Institute companies have averaged about $2.5 million for their series A raises, the largest of which was $5 million. While the Institute has produced entrepreneurs that have gone on to found companies like Cake Health, I-DISP, Identifii, Kaliki, Rentcycle, and Udemy, Founder Institute has yet to produce high-valuation companies like Dropbox and Airbnb — both of which are Y Combinator graduates and have raised over $100 million.  While more than 100 of Founder Institute’s graduates are based internationally, 20 percent have female founders, 40 percent have been funded, and the Institute plans to add another 75 international locations, the incubator has to be careful that it isn’t just becoming a startup mill. Entrepreneurs want to be sure that they receive fair ROI, and the total amount of funding raised by graduates, the number of successful exits, and high valuations can be a good marker for determining this. Founder Institute accepts an average of 30 percent of the startups that apply to its program (compared to 3 percent for Y Combinator), so startups know that they have a better chance of getting in. Yet, unlike other incubators, Founder Institute doesn’t invest in its startups, though it does take 3.5 percent of the graduating companies and puts it into a pool for the founders, mentors and people who operate local chapters.  The key for Founder Institute is its international footprint. Seed Camp, in contrast, has a significant (and growing) international presence, but it doesn’t have the same connection to Silicon Valley that Ressi has forged over the last 2.5 years. There is a growing push to invest in up-and-coming international tech hubs, and with the Institute planning 75 new locations (in London, Buenos Aires, Seoul, Bangalore, Abu Dhabi, Istanbul, and Cape Town, to name a few), the incubator may have a leg up on incubators focused solely in the U.S.  It’s also important, as part of this expansion, to get support of local governments and ecosystems. Singapore’s government has been backing 100 percent of Founder Institute grads with investment grants, market access and other services — so even without investing significant capital in startups themselves, it’s partnerships like these that will make Founder Institute continue to fly — without being seen as a startup mill. Applications for Founder Institute’s Winter 2011 program are being accepted through tomorrow, so readers interested can take FI’s “Predictive Admissions Test” and apply here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Brick and mortar store owners can now get access to the same kind of analytics available to website admins. Shopper Tracker is a new product from Argentinian developer Agile Route built off of Microsoft Kinect. It analyzes customer movements to provide traffic flow analysis and heat maps indicating which shelves are attracting shoppers and which products they touch or take. This can be tied to conversion data by product SKU to help merchants optimize where products are placed within their stores. To attain similar market research, merchants typically have to pay observers or use equipment and surveys that are expensive, inaccurate, and influence the behavior of the people they’re studying. With Shopper Tracker, multiple shoppers can be simultaneously tracked around the clock. As it doesn’t cost much more to conduct longer studies, merchants can get more confident results and do A/B testing. Prism Skylabs, a company that debuted at our TechCrunch Disrupt conference, tries to pull similar traffic flow data from a store’s existing surveillance cameras. While Shopper Tracker requires an initial set up cost of buying several Kinect sensors, it provides much more specific activity about customer behavior. You can watch a demo video of Shopper Tracker in action here. Also, check out our past Kinect coverage for more exciting hacks and a look at Microsoft’s beautiful new ad for the Kinect APIs.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily More and more of us are getting comfortable sharing our real-world identities online, but the tools for helping us maintain our online privacy and security are still catching up to our behavior. Witness the porn-and-violence spam links attack that caused many users to accidentally share and see nasty images in their news feeds. German company Secure.me has a solution, that it has recently launched to the world: an online service that analyzes your Facebook profile for any data that’s putting your privacy at risk. It’s not the only service out there. Some others include Friend Checker, Minor Monitor and SocialShield (the latter two being designed primarily for parents watching their kids). But Secure.me is interesting for a couple reasons. One is the ease of use, and the other is the dual individual and parent focus. First, the interface does a nice job of mimicking high-end virus protection software — you can see scores and analysis happening in front of you in a reassuring dashboard format. You start out simply by connecting with Facebook. The site will then automatically begin scanning your Facebook profile to identify any potential risks. Sections on the site’s left-hand navigation bar include a summary of all risks, analyses of your photos and activities, as well as sections on your profile, network and overall privacy.  The last three sections each include their own scores. Your privacy analysis is scored based on how much information you share in your information section, and it’s pretty aggressive. For instance, including your sexual orientation or political beliefs will result in a lower score than if you don’t (you never know how people might use that information against you). Your profile analysis shows a score for the mood of posts from friends and apps that you’re mentioned in, presumably based on keyword sentiment analysis. The point is apparently to help show if conversations you’re in are getting out of control. There’s also a tag cloud of trending topics to help you get a sense for what others are talking about.  The network analysis shows posts from friends and people in your network, and featuring anything that includes potentially offensive words, from “sex” and “idiot” to more serious swear words. The company will also warn you if there’s a particularly dangerous link being shared by your friends, like for the porn and graphic violence that hit Facebook several weeks ago. This section also has a mood bar to show how your friends seem to be feeling. Some extra features help the service stand out, including a tool that analyzes photos from your friends and network to identify any photos of you that you aren’t already tagged in. The parent feature works similarly to SocialShield and other competitors. You, the parent, email your child an invite link, and they sign in with Facebook and let you see what they’re sharing.  In my experience testing Secure.me, I didn’t find anything shockingly revealing. I was aware of every potential security risk that the service found for me. It didn’t find any crazy untagged photos of me, either. Maybe the boring results are simply because I’m pretty aware of how I use Facebook already? Or because I’m not that actively sharing and discussing content with people? Secure.me got its start in Germany back in 2007, building an all-purpose tool called Ruﬂotse, which lets users to track themselves across the web and in social networks. Whether because Facebook has gotten big in Germany or because Germans are especially sensitive around privacy, the Facebook analysis became an especially popular feature. The original company has its headquarters and 50,000 paying users in Europe. The international focus, which includes the “Secure.me” name, and the Facebook focus, also includes an office expansion — it’s just set up shop in San Francisco as well. Going forward, the plan is to start charging users for access to premium features, cofounder and CTO Christian Sigl tells me. These features include automatic analysis of your profile every day, the photo matching tech, extended data storage (7 days for free, 90 for paid), and multi-person access intended for parents. The site is available as a free trial now but look for the subscription request to come at the beginning of the year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, the new multi-player gaming service Nextpeer is exiting its private beta period and is now available for all iOS developers to try. With the company’s software development kit (SDK), game developers can easily turn their single player games into social, real-time, multi-player tournaments where users compete against each other for top scores, achievements and virtual gold. For those unfamiliar with Nextpeer, the service provides a way for mobile developers to upgrade their single player games to multi-player, just by dropping in the SDK . A Nextpeer-enabled game’s users can face off against in each other by competing for the best score during a timed tournament. During the tournament, gamers aren’t playing alongside each other in the sense that their characters are sharing screen time – they simply play the game as usual. Meanwhile, they’re also receiving updates as to their status versus the others in the tournament. (e.g. “Hurry up! You’re in 3rd place!”) This gives what had previously been a standalone game a sense of real-time action and excitement, and that can make the game more engaging and addictive.  Since its private beta launch in August, Nextpeer has signed up 250 developers and is now in the process of integrating its SDK into around 40 games. There are currently over half a dozen games available in the iTunes App Store featuring Nextpeer, including Chicken Rain, Word Flow, Slot Machine+, Hurry Honey!, Hold It Up, Pingo, and Castor Man, to name a few. The company says it’s on track to continue launching around 1 to 2 games per week going forward. To date, Nextpeer users have played over 25,000 tournaments, says CEO Shai Magzimof. But what’s even better is the retention rate – 30% of the users go back to play again after 3 + days. And 10% of Nextpeer users take advantage of the in-game feature that allows them to discover and download additional games which offer Nextpeer tournaments. Users tend to average around 5 tournaments each, says Magzimof. For now, there is no cost to integrate the Nextpeer SDK into a game, but Nextpeer does participate in revenue-sharing with those who allow users to place “bets” on games using the virtual gold. This split can vary depending on the game, but is around 50/50. Buying more coins via in-app purchases is not yet available, but is arriving soon. For now, there are other ways to earn currency (beyond the initial amount all players get), like daily bonuses, and, of course, winning. Also on the way is support for push notifications, which will allow users to invite friends to play with them in real-time. The Facebook integration will improved, too, so gamers can invite their Facebook friends to join them. Below is a video showing the process of integrating Nextpeer into an app. From start to finish, it takes just 15 minutes: Those interested in integrating Nextpeer into their own apps can grab the SDK from here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gowalla, the geo-social app, will soon be no more. The founders will be joining Facebook and shutting down the product a couple months after trying to reposition the app as a social travel guide. It was clear long ago that its rival Foursquare won the check-in wars, passing one billion check-ins recently and more than 10 million users. But why did it turn out this way? Both Foursquare and Gowalla launched at the 2009 SXSW conference, and many people thought Gowalla was actually better designed. At least it looked better, with more whimsical badges, for instance. But pretty doesn’t always win. “Startups and businesses are like making wine,” says Gowalla investor (and vinophile) Gary Vaynerchuk, “it is a blend. It is not about one element. Design is one element.” Another Gowalla investor explains the difference in one word: “Austin.” Gowalla was headquartered in Austin and Foursquare is based in New York. For a mobile social app that depended on urban density to gain early critical mass, New York gave Foursquare a hometown advantage over Gowalla. Foursquare was able to build better network effects early on, and those just kept compounding.  You don’t use Foursquare because it is a pretty app. You use it because all your friends use it, and because it is the geo-location platform across many apps. It is more useful because it touches more people and more apps that people care about. The other thing about Foursquare is that it didn’t try to overcomplicate things early on.  It did one thing very well: check-ins and rewards. Over time it added local recommendations and even pushed into city guides, but it remains mostly about the check-in. That’s what keeps people coming back to the app day-in and day-out. Foursquare also has Dennis Crowley as a founder. Crowley has been obsessed with the idea of mobile social geo-location apps for a decade (he tried this once before and failed with Dodgeball). Gowalla founder Josh Williams is also very talented. “He’s the kind of guy who I would back over and over,” says Vaynerchuk, even now. But again, that founder’s talent is just one element. It’s not just the founder who counts. “I think Tristan is a massively underrated character in the whole story,” says Vaynerchuk, referring to Foursquare’s business development executive Tristan Walker. “His early biz dev deals gave them a lot of clout, with major brands like Starbucks lending their brand equity to Foursquare.” Everyone has their own opinion on why Foursquare succeeded and Gowalla didn’t.  I asked why on TWitter and got a ton of feedback, Here are a few of the responses below. Add your own theories in comments: @erickschonfeld At first, Gowalla was all design and some usability whereas Foursquare just focused on check-in, so it made it simple. — Erick Davidson (@erickd) December 5, 2011  @erickschonfeld all in the name. Gowalla means nothing to people. Foursquare reminded people of their childhood(game of same name) — M T (@mtulls) December 5, 2011  @erickschonfeld For social apps design matters very little. It's all about being where your homies are at. Most were on FSQ. — Sean Percival (@Percival) December 5, 2011  @erickschonfeld urban density of NYC vs Austin = stronger base of early adopters, perhaps? — Ben Popper (@benpopper) December 5, 2011  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Spling, a new graduate from this year’s DreamIt Ventures Philly program, has just closed $400,000 in Series A funding in a round led by Deep Fork Capital and several other angel investors. The startup is entering the crowded social networking and content sharing space, with a focus on sharing links with friends. Via the site, you can share links publicly, privately or externally through Facebook or Twitter. Wait, haven’t we seen this one before? For some reason, startups keep re-inventing the content-sharing space, despite the popularity of networks like Facebook and Twitter, and even Google+. The newcomers are attempting to build something they call the “interest graph,” which, unlike the social networks based on real-world relationships (i.e., Facebook), are these new networks made up of those who share similar likes and interests. It’s a novel way to enter the social networking space without having to take on the social networking behemoths head on. Whether theres’s value in a standalone interest graph built outside of (instead of on top of) Facebook and Twitter remains to be seen, though. For example, we recently covered the launch of Subjot, a topic-based Twitter, which connects you with people based on interests. There’s also UberMedia’s Chime.in, which does much of the same. Sigh.  For what it’s worth, Spling tries to go a different route. It focuses more on sharing links with your friends than with strangers who share your interests. By posting the link to Spling first then sharing it out to Facebook and Twitter, Spling is able to build an online archive of your favorite content, categorized and tagged for later access. On Facebook and Twitter, on the other hand, that same content isn’t as easy to find after a few weeks go by. It drops out of Twitter search or falls off your Facebook wall. (Facebook’s Timeline improves access to older content, but is still not ideal for locating old links).  This quick access to a history of your shares may be the most valuable piece to Spling, because, unfortunately, there are a lot of similarities between this new startup and its competition. It introduces the idea of Circles, for example, which Spling claims to have launched (via its private beta) before Google+. The Circles essentially function just like Google+ Circles, too, except that they are symmetric (everyone in a Circle is accessing the same Circle). And since Circles can be private, they can function as a way to share links with friends which you might not want to post to Facebook for some reason. (Ahem. You know what I mean). However, Spling’s core concepts around content-sharing and interest-based networking are not unique or original. That’s not to say that there isn’t room for innovating in the content-sharing space. And it’s not always about who has the idea first, it’s about execution. But at the end of the day, Spling feels very much like the middle-of-the-road service that it is, and not something that’s breaking new ground. But considering the founders’ ages – Billy McFarland (CEO), Nic Meiring (CFO), Mac Cordrey (COO), and Henry Clifford (CTO) – were all 19 years old at the time of the round closing – there’s a team behind Spling worth watching. And maybe throwing $400K at, too. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This week we’re running a three part series by Steven Isaac, a programmer with an amazing resume including stints at Sun, Microsoft, and even a hardware start-up that brought the first (non-portable) tablets. For years he’s dreamed of an easy-to-use device with a full keyboard that slides out when needed and, together with a designer, he built the Touchfire, a fully funded Kickstarter project that has only 10 days to go before production begins. I asked him to create a series of short posts about his experience with the Kickstarter process and offer you, the hardware hackers out there, some advice and best practices. My love affair with tablet computers began in 1988, when I became the seventh employee at a secretive startup called GO. I came from Sun Microsystems, where I led the team that made Sun’s Network File System (NFS) an industry standard. We succeeded beyond all expectations, and I had become restless. A new, scrappy startup like GO seemed like the perfect antidote. GO was building one of the world’s first tablet computers, both the hardware and an entire operating system called PenPoint from scratch. My job was to write the mobility and connectivity software. Irresistible!I was at GO for 5 years. During that time the hardware group spun off into a separate company called EO, which made a line of tablets that looked like iPads with ears. Not to mention a whip antenna and a full size telephone handset, complete with curly cord, that was used to access the clunky analog cellular networks of the era. The EO tablet was quite a sight to see, but we loved that machine and all the software we built on top of it.  AT&T bought EO, then EO bought GO, and then AT&T shut the whole thing down. Tragic! But truthfully, PenPoint was all about the pen as the input device, and handwriting wasn’t the greatest way to get information into a computer. We had failed. I went on to Microsoft, where I worked on a series of 1.0 products – Microsoft’s first mobile operating system Windows CE, Internet Explorer 1.0, the first MSN.com, and ASP.NET 1.0. I left Microsoft in 2000 to start my own consulting company. The years went by. Then in the spring of 2010, Apple released the iPad. I felt as if I had stepped into a time machine. The iPad was everything we hoped for and dreamed of 20 years ago, done to perfection.  Well, almost perfect. Multi-touch typing was much better than every previous tablet input approach. But it still wasn’t great. Even Apple said that the iPad was primarily a consumption device. But I wanted to use my new iPad for everything – taking notes in real time, writing long emails, blogging, etc.So then I started thinking about how to make typing on an iPad great. And there was only one answer: add a tactile layer on top of the on-screen keyboard. Let people feel where the keys are; make typing comfortable (my fingers already hurt from banging away on the glass).  I realized that it was essential for the tactile layer to disappear when the user was finished typing. And it had to be stored within the tablet somehow, so it would always be available. How to do this? I started prototyping ideas, settling on an approach that used stacks of thin elastic material. I didn’t know how the magic disappearing act would be done, but I thought that something lightweight and flexible stood the best chance.After a few months, I finally had a promising prototype. It was now time to find a mechanical engineer or industrial designer who could take my precious prototype to the next step. The search led to Brad, my future co-founder. When he saw what I had made, he wasn’t impressed. “The prototype is pretty bad”, Brad said. “But you are a software guy and the concept could really rock if done right. Let’s get going on this.” Next: The Year Of The Prototypes Project PageThis slideshow requires JavaScript.  This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Virtualization data management software maker Actifio has raised $33.5 million in a Series C financing round led by Andreessen Horowitz, with previous backers North Bridge Venture Partners, Greylock Partners and Advanced Technology Ventures participating. Founded in 2010, the startup has secured a total of $57.5 million in venture capital funding to date. Actifio bills itself as a ‘Protection and Availability Storage’ platform company, offering data management solutions to small to medium-sized businesses, large enterprises and managed service and cloud service providers.  This is what the formal pitch sounds like: Actifio’s mission is to virtualize management of data and consumerize the operations to enable transformation of the data center into an SLA-driven services organization.  Beginning with addressing IT’s most frustrating challenges (backup, disaster recovery and business continuity), the Actifio PAS platform is expanding to address test and development, analytics, compliance, e-discovery and other business-critical requirements, creating a new category of storage that efficiently virtualizes and manages copies of production data. Peter Levine, a veteran enterprise IT exec (Veritas, XenSource, Citrix) and general partner at Andreessen Horowitz, has joined Actifio’s board. Actifio is led by CEO Ash Ashutosh (formerly VP & chief technologist of HP’s StorageWorks division), president Jim Sullivan (previously VP, Worldwide Sales at IBM System Storage) and David Chang (formerly founder and VP of Product Management at AppIQ – acquired by HP). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some readers may be familiar with Khan Academy, an awesome eLearning platform that offers students, self-starters and everyone in between the opportunity to learn at their own pace by watching instructive videos on subjects that range from arithmetic to physics. The non-profit startup has been growing like gangbusters of late, and now has more than 2,600 videos in its library. To date, Khan Academy has largely focused on math and science learning, but the startup plans to use new funding to expand into the humanities, and develop curricula for a blended physical and virtual academic experience. Supplemental learning resources like Khan Academy’s stand to play a significant role in the changing educational landscape. The fact of the matter is that, while we might be in a higher education bubble, colleges and universities (public institutions, especially) face a challenging economic climate, which has led to budget cutbacks across the board. This is exacerbated by the increase in student enrollment, along with dwindling resources available to students and teachers, chief among them the limit of physical space within classrooms. There is also (thankfully) a growing pressure to ramp up science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education on campuses across the country, but many instituions are struggling to keep pace while maintaining student engagement and quality of their courses. One startup, like Khan Academy, has built an online platform that can become part of the solution, allowing universities to continue providing engaging curricula even when resources may not be available. Late Nite Labs, a New York City-based startup, offers an web-based educational platform for distance and hybrid learning settings that lets students take biology and chemistry labs, for example, without the real-life explosions. The startup’s virtual lab platform contains more than 150 experiment simulations, which come equipped with all the compounds, chemicals, containers, and instruments one would typically find in wet labs. Many state schools, community colleges, and public universities have had to shut down wet labs — or never had them in the first place — where students learn to master beakers and Bunsen burners and take part in those complex mad science experiments. So, Late Nite Labs has digitized this setting to allow professors to serve their lessons over the Web, without requiring additional text or materials. Educators can create and manage their courses using virtualized labs and assignments, each of which has a digital lab notebook, media player, and supporting images and video for the experiments.  The platform comes with (150+) standardized courses that meet national science requirements, or teachers can use the platform to create their own customized classes. It’s also drag and drop and completely interactive, so universities can save on that wet lab overhead of buying expensive and dangerous materials, with the added benefit of not having to worry about student injury due to mischievous (or accidental) chemical mixing.  And, instead of selling their platform directly to universities of high schools, Late Nite Labs offers its virtual coursework through its website or in campus bookstores, so students can purchase it directly. Schools, therefore, pay nothing. Now, this sounds like a big burden for students, who are, by and large, already financially burdened, but at an average of $50 for access to the virtual labs, it’s really equivalent to what students would be paying for physical textbooks and course materials (and lab fees) anyway.  Plus, students have the benefit of being able to use the virtual labs from anywhere, to practice, learn, and move at their own pace — something that will hopefully be a critical part of educational systems and edtech solutions moving forward. And so far, institutions are buying in, as Late Nite Labs is now being used by more than 150 schools across the country, including 56 of the 58 community colleges in North Carolina, Ole Miss, Oregon State, Oklahoma State, Iowa State, New Mexico State, and Arizona State, to name a few.  Today, Late Nite Labs is announcing that it has raised $1.1 million in seed funding from a number of angel investors, including Harold Levy, the former Chancellor of New York City’s public school system and EVP of Kaplan, as well as Don Burton, former head of Business Development for Disney Education. Late Nite Labs’ VP of Business Development Harris Goodman tells us that the startup will be using the new capital to expand its team from five to 12, including hiring engineers and sales and marketing staff. For now, Late Nite Labs is exclusively offered through universities and high schools, but the team plans to build a consumer product down the road as well as work its way into K-12 curricula. It currently offers Chemistry and Biology classes, with Microbiology and forensics labs on the way. For more, check Late Nite Labs out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily GlobalSCAPE, which specializes in information exchange solutions for enterprise customers, this morning announced that it has acquired TappIn, maker of an eponymous cloud-based file access and sharing solution.  TappIn, formerly known as HomePipe Networks, was picked up for $9 million in cash, though shareholders stand to receive another $8 million if certain performance-based milestones are met over the next three years. TappIn basically lets you access any files (documents, images, videos and whatnot) stored on your computers, external hard drives or other storage devices from any Web browser or modern smartphone – the service supports iOS, Android and Windows Phone 7. Unlike services such as Box and Dropbox, TappIn lets you access digital content without to need to upload or sync said files. There are obvious security risks involved with that approach, but TappIn claims all content gets compressed and encrypted before it is accessed from another device than the one it is stored on. Founded in 2009, TappIn will a wholly-owned subsidiary of GlobalSCAPE, and all the company’s employees – including executives Chris Hopen, Parvez Anandam, Doug Wheeler, and Andrew Tull – will remain in its hometown of Seattle.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily uTest, which provides software developers with a variety of testing services for their Web, desktop and mobile applications, has raised $17 million in Series D funding in a round led by QuestMark Partners. The new capital will be used to launch new tools to aid developers, and to open more offices in the United States – namely Seattle, Chicago, Los Angeles and Dallas (for starters). QuestMark co-invested with earlier uTest backers Scale Venture Partners, Longworth Venture Partners, Egan-Managed Capital and Mesco, at double the valuation of the company’s $13 million Series C round. The startup has secured more than $37 million since its inception in 2007. uTest says part of the fresh funding will be used for mergers and acquisitions. The company basically provides “in-the-wild” testing services that span the entire development lifecycle for any software application through a series of crowd-sourced testings, including functional, security, localization and usability testing.  uTest says it currently has a community of 45,000+ testers readily available from 180 countries to put Web, mobile and desktop apps to the test on “real devices under real-world conditions”.  Customer includes well-known global brands like Google, Microsoft, Groupon, AOL and the BBC. Looks like uTest’s got its work cut out for it, too:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’re going to be tempted, but don’t do it. Don’t add all your friends on Path. Don’t come anywhere near the 150-friend limit. And make the tough decision to reject the friend requests of people you care about. Because the whole point of Path 2 is sharing everything, and you won’t do that if you’re sharing to people that aren’t your best friends. Path’s power comes from the intimacy of your connections, not the quantity. This is difficult to adjust to because we’ve been conditioned by most social applications to connect with everyone we know. Path is different because it’s a micronetwork, not an interest network or general social network. It can but isn’t designed for sharing content that’s relevant to a wide audience, like the articles you publicly tweet, or the major life events you share with hundreds of Facebook friends. Path lets you share things that only people who really care about you want to know, like when you wake up and go to sleep, or when you travel more than a few miles. If you are friends on Path with anyone you might feel embarrassed by sharing that content with, or that you think wouldn’t find that stuff interesting, you’re much less likely to share. The maximum sharing volume likely comes with a friend count of between 3 and 5. As you hit 15, 40, or 100, you’ll censor yourself more, and find less reason to use Path in addition to other services. That means you have to undertake the socially awkward experience of rejecting requests from your co-workers, acquaintances, and fellow early adopters, and make sure not to put them in the same position. You may have already let some loose acquaintances into your inner circle or have outstanding requests from Path 1, and will need to go in and remove them. I’ve received a dozen Path friend requests from people I’m hardly comfortable sharing my Facebook posts with, let alone my sleeping habits. This indicates a widespread lack of understanding of Path that the company will need to address.  The fact that you’re not trying to maximize your audience creates a fundamental distribution problem for Path and any other micronetwork that pops up. How will the mainstream ever find out about Path or think it’s work their time if they’re not bombarded with invites?  This may unfortunately be why micronetworks won’t succeed as standalone products, and may need to live within your general social network service of choice. Really, Path is about granularity — the ability to share with a subset of your friends. For now, this binary “Share just to Path friends, or share to all your friends” may be adequate. Eventually as devices like the Jawbone Up give us more personal data, I think we’ll want even more sharing granularity. Depending on the content, we’ll want to the option to share to just our very best friends, our close friends, our nearby friends, all of our acquaintances, or the public. We might not be ready for it now though, judging by Facebook’s failed attempts to get everyone creating lots of Friend Lists. Path has a chance to own the micronetwork space until we’re ready for more granularity. However, to retain its value, Path must somehow keep users from reducing its distinction from existing social networks. Its on-boarding process may need to help by suggesting you only add your closest friends based on those you wall post or @reply with. It will hurt its growth, and finding the proper language will be tricky, but it is crucial that Path make it clear to users that they shouldn’t add just anyone. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInTechCrunch Tokyo Japan 2011: The Cambrian Explosion In Startups [Video]A massive number of species appeared and began evolving some 580 million years ago, forming the basis of modern life. Now we’re in the middle of another “Cambrian Explosion,” Erick Schonfeld explains in the video above, where the internet is primed for new startups like Precambrian Earth was for rapid evolution. Lower costs for getting started and the prevalence of internet-connected devices make it more possible for new companies to create big changes in seemingly slow-growing industries like health care, education and transportation. But that’s not great for everyone. Like the fossils show, many of the species didn’t find a way to survive in the ever-changing world. The video is of a talk Erick gave at TechCrunch Japan‘s Tokyo 2011 conference this past week. You can read his original article on the topic here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Aaron Patzer, the founder of Mint, has a new project that he is spending half his time on (he continues to spend the other half as VP of Product Innovation at Intuit, which acquired Mint two years ago for $170 million). His new project is called Swift, and it is his vehicle (if you will) to exlore the feasibility of building a personal maglev vehicle transit system. “The goal is to see if I can develop a new transportation system to displace cars in most urban and suburban settings,” he told me recently, “with the goal being 5x the speed, and bringing the cost of maglev from today’s costs of $50m / mile down to $4-5m / mile, which would be the same as adding one lane of asphalt/concrete road.  Not sure if it will pan out, as I’m deep in the science and simulation phase.” After a lot of analysis and setting up some simulations, he figures that he can built a system with two-person “pods” hanging underneath maglev rails which will operate at the equivalent of 800 miles-per-gallon, at 3 to 4 times the speed of regular cars.  But even that will not be enough to displace cars.  He’s concluded that the numbers don’t pan out.  And he just shared his findings in an extensive blog post.  It has all sorts of details on his concept and how it would work, but here is the conclusion: While a 3-4x velocity improvement, 800+mpg energy efficiency, and 3-4x reduction in cost over light-rail systems, it’s not enough to displace cars.  The future of transportation is still the concrete and asphalt road, for the simple reason that at $17 per tonne of asphalt versus $900 per tonne of steel or $10,000 per tonne of copper, roads are the only thing cheap enough to be ubiquitous in lower density areas.  Not even the ultra lightweight track of Swift looks cheap enough to displace roads outside of dense urban areas where, because it uses a much smaller rolling stock (number of vehicles) and can have higher throughput, mass transit is likely a better approach. If roads are the future, then so is the self-driving car, functioning like an on-demand taxi system, connected into a centralized traffic database to avoid congestion and minimize time, and driven by computers in a platoon formation of 5-10 cars to minimize aerodynamic drag by up to 35%. It is quite possible the same system-level traffic engineering algorithms developed at Swift can be used in such a self-driving system.  That said, Swift PRT as a maglev concept will be abandoned.  No track-based system (not maglev, not light-rail or metro systems) can compete with the cost and ubiquity of roads for population densities below 5000 people / km2. It looks like those self-driving cars Google is developing might not be such a crazy idea after all. I hope Patzer figures it out. These are exactly the kinds of big, world-changing ideas startup founders should be tackling. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInTC Tokyo Interview With Tonchidot CEO Takahito IguchiWhen I was in Japan earlier this week, I ran into Tonchidot CEO Takahito Iguchi at the TechCrunch Tokyo conference and dragged him back to my makeshift studio for an impromptu interview about the state of augmented reality and mobile apps. Tonchidot launched its Sekai Camera app at TechCrunch50 in 2008 before anyone really believed that augmented reality apps were possible. They were the crowd favorite. In the video above Iguchi tells me that Sekai Camera has been downloaded 3 million times (mostly in Japan), and the AR app can add data from any partner as an overlay through its API. With Sekai camera, you look through your phone’s camera, and floating icons indicate place information, deals, photos, among other things. It is also an AR platform for social games. Iguchi thinks he can improve the experience with better data and image-matching technology. One way he plans on collecting better data in the form of user-uploaded photos is a new photo-sharing app he is working on codenamed Peek-and-Poke. He showed it to me backstage. It is a cross between Batch and the original Color in that it makes it easy to create and share photo albums with other people at the same event or location. But Iguchi is more interested in how he can use those photos to augment his augmented-reality app. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been only a month since SimpleGeo co-founder Joe Stump left his last company, following its acquisition by Urban Airship, but he’s already launching a new product (and company) today called Sprintly. The company was actually founded in March by Stump’s co-founder Graham Blache, and Stump tells me he’s “been plotting this product for nearly a decade.”  The startup is completely bootstrapped so far. Sprintly is a simple project management tool that is built for both software developers and other people in a company who rely on them. It is designed to remove the frustrations developers have with working in their own silo. Traditionally, programmers use bug tracking tools and the own product-management systems, only to be bugged incessantly by non-engineers about the status of new features or fixes. Sprintly gives the non-programmers a top-level view into what the engineers are doing and how far along they are. For the developers themselves, it gives them a drag-and-drop way for keeping track of projects. The approach reminds my of Trello, a project management service Joel Spolsky launched last September at Disrupt SF. The video demo below gives an overview of the service, which $9 per user per month after a one-month free trial. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest contributor Aaron Harris is a co-founder of Tutorspree, the marketplace for tutoring. Follow him @harris, or take a lesson from him on Tutorspree. We’re seeing people move away from finance and law and towards a culture of building things. It’s great to see more people seek careers in technology. The problem, I find, is that so many people approach the transition poorly. The first, and I suppose seemingly easiest claim and means to justify your place in the startup world, as someone who has no experience, is to call yourself a product person. But that claim generally comes with a fundamental misunderstanding of what it means to do product. It is not code for a person who doesn’t really know how to do anything but thinks he can boss engineers around. It doesn’t refer to marketing guys who had an idea. Understanding what it means to drive a product means understanding the full scope of the vision of your company. It means understanding your engineering team, their capabilities, and their priorities. It means understanding what your next move is, and what your 6th move is from every angle. And here’s my dark secret—a year and a half ago, I was sort of one of those “product guys.” I was still working in finance. I had big ideas, but had never managed product at a tech company. I’m sure I said a lot of dumb things, and there are definitely people who thought I was a schmuck. But, I had managed product for a group of 30 at the fund I worked for—so I had a sense of how to work with developers. I had known how to code at one point in my life (well, AP CS style, anyway). And, I think most importantly, I was very well aware of how ignorant I was (and, to be fair, still am). When I decided I wanted to lead product, I went and talked to friends who were product managers. If you don’t have friends that are PMs, try to stalk one on Quora until you can get a meeting. Make sure you have the questions you need to ask ahead of time. Pick their brains about what they read, how they think about feature design relative to user needs/wants/haven’t even thought abouts. Realistically speaking, there are certain people who will never be able to lead product of any kind. But there are also people who might be able to do it, if they worked on it, if they put the time and effort ahead of building jargon. So, humbly, here’s a starter guide for learning product (given some prerequisite imagination). Even with this as a starting point, you’re never guaranteed to become great at product. But, doing this, I got a little bit better every day. More importantly, I was able to earn the trust of my co-founders Josh and Ryan that I’d make the best decisions I was able, and take the criticism when I screwed up. So, “product guys:” nobody is going to believe you or take you seriously until you prove it. If you start talking about mobile local social software as a service (MOLASSES), you will be laughed out of the room. You are not, fundamentally, a product person until you actually build products. In order to get to the point where you can build products, you need to do a hell of a lot of work, and you need to iterate on your own knowledge. You will need to understand that you are not the boss of an engineer, or superior to an engineer, simply because you think you have vision. If you are lucky, you will become a partner to a great engineer (or teams of them). You will be a member of a team where everyone has a valid say, but the decision will ultimately be yours. Your view won’t win out just because you talk louder or faster—it will win if it’s the right thing and you can back it up with logic, with experience, and with numbers. So if you want to get into technology and don’t code, if you think you have a knack for product and a killer idea, start reading and learning. Then convince an engineer, as an equal, without blustering. Until you get there, you just have an idea. That’s nice, but it’s the very first step in a long road. Photo credit: Shutterstock/Paffy Latest headlines delivered to you daily We first covered AboutOne as part of a round-up of some of the more interesting startups to present their wares onstage at DEMO Spring 2011. The startup is building eManagement system that makes it easy for busy families to organize their lives and households. And today AboutOne has announced that it has closed $1.6 million in series A financing, led by Golden Seeds, a network of early-stage investing angels who focus on companies founded and led by women. The Philadelpha-based startup was founded by CEO Joanne Lang, who is a former SAP Labs exec, cloud computing specialist, and mother of four children. The idea for AboutOne came out of an experience she had when one of her young sons had a medical emergency: Away from home, she was unable to provide a current list of his medications to paramedics. Leveraging the evolution of cloud platforms to bring efficiency and organization to enterprises, businesses, and the consumer Web, she set out to develop a technology that could help in emergencies like the one she experienced, and simplify the lives of moms (and parents) trying to organize their households.  AboutOne was created from my direct experiences as a mother of four children,” said Lang. A former SAP Labs executive specializing in cloud technology, Lang developed AboutOne after one of her sons had a medical emergency. She was away from home, with only her keys and phone, and unable to provide a list of his medications to the paramedics. She’d seen how cloud computing helps businesses gain new levels of efficiency and wanted to use her technical training and personal experiences to develop technology that simplifies a mom’s life. The ambitious goal for AboutOne, according to the founder is to become the standard for family management systems, and tap into the sizable 82.8 million-strong mom market. To help achieve its goal, AboutOne has forged partnerships with Microsoft and Suze Orman of IDSafe, launching an updated version of the platform based on feedback it’s received from its current customers as well as its partners. The startup will use its latest round of funding to increasing its marketing efforts in conjunction with expanding its engineering staff to help push out product updates scheduled for the next six months.  One of these, which has been designed based on feedback from customers and partners, will be the AcornPoints rewards program launching in January. This new feature will be a great enhancement for the platform, as it will provide points-based, financial incentive to parents who complete their organization goals and checkpoints.  The upgrades will add to AboutOne’s patent-pending technology platform, which as it currently stands, offers moms the ability to store digitized photos, video, and text, create photo albums, store insurance contracts, keep track of anniversaries, birthday, etc. in calendars, keep contact lists, and post instructions to baby sitters, for example. Information is backed up hourly. The platform looks to make data entry smooth whether it’s from a smartphone, scanner, or any other web-enabled device. And once families have it set up, it can enable automation of these processes, including creation of hard copy memory books, family newsletters, online health summaries, greeting cards, etc. — all of which can mail themselves to intended recipients. It’s a pretty robust system for $30/year. For more check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In an effort to get customers buying pre-paid deals more regularly, LivingSocial has launched a new subscription service called “LivingSocial Plus”. For $20 a month, members get $25 in “Deal Bucks” credits that are automatically applied to their next purchase as well as access to closed deals. LivingSocial is cleverly pitching buyers on Plus with a checkout graphic that shows the price of the currently viewed deal instantly reduced by the $5 in bonus Deal Bucks. Subscription services like this could solve a fundamental problem of deal providers where users only stop by to purchase especially lucrative or relevant deals. If these program gain traction, providers could establish a consistent revenue stream, get users buying more frequently, and score free cash if credits are never redeemed. Expect rampant copying if competitors see the subscription model working. LivingSocial Plus is only in beta now, so its URL redirects to the general site if you’re not in the test base. A Help center article confirms its existence. though. The pre-paid deal provider started offering membership to deal buyers around Black Friday. Previously the only way to earn Deal Bucks was to invite friends to the service. The deal provider has been aggressively innovating in search of new models that could save it from the decline impacting Groupon. It just launched LivingSocial Instant and Room Service last month that lets people get discounted food delivered on demand. While the $20 that buyers actually paid for with Plus are good for 5 years, the $5 in bonus bucks expire at the end of each monthly billing period. This create a sense of urgency where members rush to buy deals just to get that extra $5 off. The whole daily deals model is built on this notion of perceived value exceeding what users have to pay, even if they’re paying for things they don’t need. Meanwhile, it’s really the deal providers that could win since most purchases net them far more than $5. In this way, the subscription model fits perfectly with LivingSocial and any other deal provider’s business. By clustering lower quality, higher margin deals at the end of the billing period when users are desperate to spend their fleeting bonus credits, providers could coerce members into buying deals that make them more money. Access to closed deals is a great addition to the subscription package, since buyers may be willing to pay for it but it doesn’t cost providers anything. LivingSocial may have figured out the next big thing in daily deals. Now it just has to watch out for copy cats offering even bigger bonuses. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back when we first wrote about Vayable (the site that lets just about anyone offer to host paid tours/activities for travelers) Alexia said it was “like an Airbnb for Travel Experiences.” Airbnb would agree, it seems. We’ve learned tonight that Airbnb is prepping to launch a partnership to upsell travelers with Vayable’s tour experiences. The partnership will be limited to e-mail at first (a “Oh, you’re going here? Check out these Vayable tours!” type thing), though the partnership may find deeper roots if it proves successful. It will initially be limited to e-mails sent to Airbnb customers headed for New York. We were initially clued in on the partnership by an anonymous tipster, and have since backed up the report with an independent source. This will be Airbnb’s first partnership of the sort, though it’s probably safe to assume that it won’t be the last. The world is quickly filling up with myriad “Airbnb of X”, so Airbnb might as well find a way to tap into them. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The floor of Silicon Valley is littered with the carcasses of failed search startups. Without billions of dollars in resources like Microsoft or a tight vertical focus like travel site Kayak to help attract users, would-be competitors haven’t been able to pull people away from Google. Helioid is a small startup out of New York that’s trying to change that, by delivering results tied to categories of information. It’s aiming at students, professionals and others who are trying to do exploratory research across a topic, and aren’t just looking for a specific answer to a question. Its search results page shows a color-coded section on the left-hand side for the categories that it determines are most related to the search term. Each result has a dot next to it matching one of these categories, and a label showing the relative size of that category, with the most relevant ones at the top of the section. If you click on any of the categories, you’ll add the category term as keywords to the search and generate a new, more focused set of results and related categories. You can keep doing this to generate increasingly focused results. The overall advantage to the interface is that the categories reveal related areas to explore, that you might not easily identify on your own within the keyword-driven paradigm seen on the main pages of Google and Bing.  For example, let’s say I want to study up on popular types of fishing. A search for “fishing” shows me a set of relevant categories including “fly,” “salmon,” “saltwater,” etc. I click on “saltwater” and “deep is a top result. Adding that term then shows me a range of results about deep sea fishing. Founder and chief executive Kenny Hamilton intends for Helioid to be a complement to general search engines, by helping specific types of professionals — journalists and bloggers (some of whom have started talking about it already), financial analysts, lawyers, etc. — get up to speed quickly on new topics. The business model is aimed in this direction, too. Beyond targeted search ads, he tells me that the company is looking at premium services for professionals, including private indexing for data that a particular user or organization is trying to analyze.  Helioid’s challenge in providing a general search tool is both to avoid making its product so complex that it cuts out potential users, and at the same time differentiate itself from Google in a way that users care about. Existing startups that are aiming to provide a better layer of organization to searches, like Blekko and its slashtags, face the same sorts of problems. Googles’ “Related searches” page is stiff competition. But, while I’m not sure how well Helioid will be able to penetrate its target market, the interface is intuitive, and I found it useful for topic exploration in testing. Hamilton and his cofounder, Peter Lubell-Doughtie, met while getting undergraduate degrees at Stanford (physics and symbolic systems, respectively). Hamilton has been building Helioid for the last few years, while Lubell-Doughtie has been working on it part-time while he finished a graduate degree in artificial intelligence at the University of Amsterdam. They haven’t taken funding. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The healthcare industry is in the middle of a number of crises, not the least of which is the modernization of its internal infrastructure. Having worked in the industry myself, I can attest that the amount of faxing, carbon copies, and redundancy are mind blowing, especially at overworked, underfunded hospitals. We’ve seen a lot of health startups over the last two years, though naturally many of the ones we’ve covered are more user-facing, like Disrupt finalist Cake Health. But the backend is just as important, and a new $50M fund has just been established by MergerTech specifically for investment in that sector. MergerTech Capital, as it is called, focuses on “IT infrastructure associated with healthcare, including cloud services, data security, consumer Internet, mobile applications, and managed IT.” Sounds like that includes some of the mobile and web apps we’ve seen connecting users to their healthcare data, but it’s also about establishing the services that provide that data and presumably the people and hardware that will make them possible. The fund will be led by new General Partner Maneesh Goyal, formerly of Miramar Ventures. There he led the fund’s healthcare IT investments for 5 years will lead the fund to startups helping doctors and hospitals provide more efficient care. MergerTech Advisors senior executives Nitin Khanna and Karan Khanna will also be managing the fund. The two sold their government agency management software system Saber to IT portfolio EDS for $420 million in May 2007 before moving to MergerTech. The full press release is here. Goyal confirmed that no initial investments have been announced, and as their charter covers quite a bit of ground, any guesses would be fairly wild speculation. There’s plenty of room for failure, and many startups are deluding themselves assuming they don’t have to develop a business model. MergerTech Capital will need to be discerning in where it spreads its $50 million. But with more capital than ever in the space, now’s the time for developers to take risks and try to build something that saves people’s lives. Thanks to Aldo for the tip. [Josh Constine contributed to this story] Latest headlines delivered to you daily Promoboxx, a TechStars Boston 2011 company focused on brand-to-retailer marketing, has just closed its seed round of $565,000. The funding comes from individual angels Dave Balter, Peter Bordes, Adam Berrey, Jean Hammond and others. In addition, institutions including SK Ventures, Brand Ventures, and Launch Capital have also committed. The company’s online service allows retailers to quickly set up online promotions, while also allowing brands to set up promotions that are automatically customized for local retailers’ use. Today, brands spend nearly $30 billion each year supporting retailers with offline materials, including in-store signage, yellow page ads and newspaper ads. But almost none of that marketing money is spent online, even though 90% of all products are still sold through physical stores.  That’s where Promoboxx comes in. Using its online service, stores can set up retail promotions in minutes, with sweepstakes, coupons, giveaways and other promotions that aim to drive foot traffic to stores. The online dashboard allows retailers to publish those promotions anywhere, including via email or to social networking sites like Facebook. It also supports things like custom Facebook tabs, and Facebook “like” requirements to collect leads. On the backend, the service offers a drag-and-drop promo builder, real-time conversion reports, custom entry form creation tools, data exports, templated legal contest rules and privacy policy forms, and more. Brands, on the other hand, can also use the service to set up one promotion that’s automatically customized for an unlimited number of retailers, using all the same tools to tap into the retailers’ local client base.  From the dashboard, the brand can track the promotion impressions, leads and conversion rates across all the retailers involved. Promoboxx is headquartered in Kendal Square, Cambridge, MA, and is now working with brands like Primesport, Cat Footwear, Bates Footwear, Vertx, and Mattingly Sports. The company’s founders, Ben Carcio, Sonciary Honnoll, and Dan Koziak, have deep marketing backgrounds, allowing them to bring their expertise to this new company. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There are two main complaints that always crop up whenever you mention Pandora: its music catalog is too small and it’s not available outside the U.S. That’s room enough for another startup to move into the streaming radio space, at least according to the folks at the new Miami-based streaming music startup Senzari. The service recently launched into private beta in the U.S. and Brazil, with plans to expand further into Latin America, Spain and Australia in the future. In addition, where Pandora currently offers a catalog of 900,000 songs, Senzari has launched with over 10 million. It also includes Facebook integration, including live chat with Facebook friends. The new startup is backed by $2 million in funding from undisclosed angel investors in Silicon Valley and Boston (mainly friends and family) and a private equity group in Southern California. It’s the fourth startup from serial entrepreneur Bill Hajjar, who has previous experience in wireless, mobile and the location-based service industries. Of course, the main value proposition for any new radio service is the same as Pandora’s: people want radio. “80% of the U.S. market would rather have a lean-back experience,” Hajjar explains. What he means is that the majority of listeners want to just push play to enjoy music and discover new bands, not search for tracks and build playlists. But streaming radio doesn’t have to battle against the paid music subscription services, like the increasingly popular Spotify, MOG, Rdio or Rhapsody, Hajjar says. Both can co-exist.  It’s the like the difference between buying CDs versus just flipping on the (terrestrial) radio. Still, taking on the newly IPO’d Pandora is no small matter. That’s why Senzari is focused on Pandora’s weakest spots, mainly its catalog’s size and the market it serves. Hajjar says Senzari has managed to secure the licensing rights for radio webcasting in the U.S., Brazil and Spain, which allows it to operate outside the U.S. (Spain’s launch comes later this month). It also has a strategic partnership with RED Viacom, which represents ad sales for other Viacom properties, like Nickelodeon, VH1, MTV and Comedy Central. However, this partnership is only in Latin America right now. As for Senzari’s web-based player, it’s not too bad (except that it requires Flash, that is). The uncomplicated user interface is easy to navigate and it pulls in photos from Flickr and Last.fm to provide an interesting background image to complement the music. While opinions are subjective, of course, coming from Pandora, I prefer Senzari’s darker colors and minimal feel. If anything, it looks more like Spotify’s desktop app than it does an online player. (See comparison shots below).   Also like Spotify, Senzari is focused on deep Facebook integration. You can see what friends are listening to (radio stations, though, not custom playlists) and like Pandora, you can post what you’re listening to on your Facebook profile. But Senzari goes a step further: it also functions as a Facebook instant messaging client, listing your Facebook friends in a column to the right of the player. You can click to see what they’re playing or simply start a chat session. Full Open Graph integration is planned for January. Each station is personalized to an individual user, not just via your playing behavior, but also using data pulled in from your Facebook user profile and “likes.” That means your “Adele” station may be different from your friends’. To allow you to experience broader music discovery, you can favorite your own station but also subscribe to those built by others. An “Activity Feed” section is also available, which, much like Pandora’s (for those who authenticate with Facebook), shows you who’s listening to what and when. As Senzari is still in private beta, there’s no advertising interrupting the radio streams just yet, but later, the site will feature a combination of takeover ads, banners and audio ads. Mobile apps for iPhone, iPad and Android will arrive early next year. In order to get into Senzari, you’ll need an invite from a current user, sent to you via Facebook. TechCrunch readers, however, can go to senzari.com/techcrunch to get in today. This link will only be good for 24 hours starting now. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online and mobile payment service Dwolla has announced that all transactions under $10 will have no fee from now on. This is of course great news for small businesses and merchants whose average transaction is below that. Anything above still carries the flat $0.25 fee. The company has a history of experimentation, and the payments space is certainly ripe for disruption from any number of angles, but it’s still not clear what has enabled this particular move. After all, operational overhead is a real thing, and while nobody doubts the company’s honest interest in changing payment processing, it’s not likely they just did this in the spirit of the season. In all likelihood it has something to do with the announcement they’re planning for two weeks from now, which will mark the company’s first birthday (or rather, the first anniversary of their national launch) and, according to CEO Ben Milne, represent a major and “necessary” platform pivot by the company. Chances are that the mobile payment service has seen obstacles to its growth that are insurmountable in its current form. While a few thousand satisfied customers is nothing to complain about, the market is much, much larger than that and perhaps this “confusing” change might be the alternative to that slow expiration common to inflexible startups. We’ll have that news when it hits. In the meantime Dwolla users should probably gather their wits about them in case the changes are less than suitable for their purposes. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Finally? Yes, that’s what the users of the Toronto-based photography community 500px will be saying today, as the service publicly launches its long-awaited Lightroom publisher plugin. Although often pitched as a Flickr alternative (ahem), 500px is actually targeted more towards professional photographers and those who make a living off selling their photos, than is towards the mainstream consumer user base who needs a place to archive hundreds of baby photos and vacation pics. And that’s why the Lightroom plugin is such a big deal. The 500px user community has been clamoring for this plugin for some time now, since it’s been a bit of a hassle for users of Adobe Photoshop Lightroom to get their photos from Lightroom into 500px. But with the new release, which was tested by over 500 photographers during its beta period, it’s about to be much easier. The plugin now allows photographers to: The new plugin supports Lightroom 2 (in export mode only) and Lightroom 3 (publishing and export modes) and is now available as a free download here. Last month, the startup released its iPad application, which saw over 100,000 downloads in the first week alone. But 500px’s Creative Director, Evgeny Tchebotarev, is being a bit cagey when it comes to revealing the actual size of the 500px user community. He says that they’re waiting to hit a “big milestone” before the reveal, which should come soon. He will say, however, that the startup increased its user base 15 times since January, and expects to see a 20-fold increase by year-end. In June, the company reported going from 1,000 users in 2009 to over 85,000, with around 45,000 having joined in the previous three months. And in October, the company said it was seeing 6.6 million visits to its site per month, so you can extrapolate from there. 500px raised $525,000 in Series A this summer, with investment from High Line Venture Capital, Deep Creek Capital and ff Venture Capital. Now that the Lightroom plugin has launched, 500px says it’s working on a big update to the iPad app, which will also be out soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this month, the Q&A-cum-social-networking service Formspring launched its first ever user Directory, with the intent on better highlighting the most popular users within a given category like “Music,” “Sports” or “Fashion.” Today, the company is expanding its focus on connecting users based on interests, and is rolling out an update that will allow users to click on any tag in their own profile to discover all those on Formspring who share that same interest. After clicking on a tag – like “movies,” for example, or even something as narrow as “half marathons” – a directory of Formspring users appears. From there, you can then follow any of the listed users you choose. The idea is that as you expand your social network on Formspring, this will, in turn, lead to more questions in your inbox. And Q&A, despite all these changes, is still very much the core focus of Formspring’s service. In some ways, Formspring feels like the more casual, playful competitor to the expert answers resource that is the continually addictive (and a bit nerdy) startup Quora. But Formspring’s top competition comes not from fellow Q&A sites, but from the “Ask” feature on Tumblr, which allows users to accept questions from others and then post answers publicly on their blog. If anything, Formspring is trying to go more of the Tumblr route these days, than it is trying to take on other Q&A services. That is to say, it’s increasingly focused on social and on “social discovery,” another common trend. Q&A is just the means to make those social connections happen. The company says that this move is also designed to better serve Formspring’s advertising partners who can now better target user communities based on users’ interests…Wait, so all this online socializing is just another way for advertisers to reach me – don’t we already have Facebook for that? Oh, I kid, Formspring, I kid. (Well, sort of). The new changes will roll out later tonight on the East Coast, and sometime this afternoon for Pacific Coast users. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The L.A.-based startup nProgress is launching a new social discovery app ntro this morning, backed by over $1.7 million in funding from Jarl Mohn, Gordon Crawford, Kevin Wall, Activation Media Partners, Baroda Ventures, SV Angel, Jeff Pulver and Richard Crowell. The app, available now for iPhone and Android, is meant to connect you with others around who you may know through mutual friends or with those who share a common interest. But unlike the others in this space (and there are plenty), ntro is staging its rollout to its target markets. It launches today in L.A. and the San Francisco Bay area, with additional cities planned for the future. Ntro is offering an interesting combination of features we’ve previously seen in other “social discovery” apps, like Sonar, Banjo, Mingle and Holler, to name just a few. Like Sonar, ntro highlights those nearby you may know through mutual friends. Like Holler, it connects people around interests. Like Mingle, it’s focused on making introductions. And like Banjo, it does it all automatically. Where ntro may have a bit of an edge, at least for now, is in terms of the customizations it provides. There are extensive filters and controls offered, allowing you to set your top interests as well as filter and search the surrounding crowd by very narrow interests. That is, not just “music” or “rock music” but the name of a favorite band, for example. There’s also a heavy focus on privacy – the app never shares your location, nor does it share your personal info (like your phone number, email or even last name) without your consent. With these extensive protections in place, there’s a bit of distance between you and those around you, which is quite unlike the creepy/awesomeness that is the social stalkerish Banjo or Sonar. In testing ntro, I couldn’t even see users’ profile photos, which is either due to the photo approval process (there’s a delay) or users’ own choice to not show their face (that’s an option). But if you really think you’ve found your soulmate/business connection/new best friend based on interests, you can message them via the app. The other standout feature from ntro is the cover flow-esque way you browse through interests, where every item, whether a band, a book, a sport, an activity, etc., is given its own thumbnail. You then just tap the thumbnail to who else likes that item and is nearby. At present, anyone can download the app and poke around, but only those in L.A. and S.F. will find nearby matches. The focus for the rollout is on large metro areas, with the next cities planned being New York, Chicago, D.C. and Boston. You can try the app now via the download iTunes or the Android Market. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When I earned my PADI open water diver certification, I had every intention of making scuba diving a regular hobby. Then I got a baby and everything changed. I haven’t been able to dive since, but I still have my logbook and keep looking for opportunities to get back into a wetsuit. The next time I do, I’ll be sure to log my dive at Diveboard, a new online dive logbook.  Diveboard lets you manually enter dives, or you can automatically upload output from one of several supported dive computers. (Extra props to Diveboard for supporting Linux!). You can share your dives, including linking to any pictures you might have taken while underwater, as well as see other users’ dives and pictures.  You can also track the number and kinds of fish you’ve spotted, if you’re into that sort of thing. Diveboard is taking things a couple of extra steps by sharing their collected data with safety and scientific organizations. Users can elect to not share anything, share their data anonymously, or be identified as the owner of their data. Medical information will be shared with the Divers Alert Network (with whom less than 5% of divers regularly share their dive data). Water temperature information will be shared with divers4oceanography.org/; and species occurrence data will be shared with the Ocean Biographic Information System. If you’re a diver just looking to log your dives, you can also help out these other organizations just by logging your dives on Diveboard. Good stuff. According to Diveboard’s Alex Casassovici, the intent is to keep the site free to use for divers. As he says, “diving is expensive enough already.” The team specifically wants to keep the site fun and useful for divers. Casassovici recognizes that most social networks (Facebook, Google+, etc) can’t adequately cater to the needs of niche groups, and he wants to see Diveboard be meaningful to and successful with the niche population of divers. If you’re a diver, why not take Diveboard for a spin? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sociocast, which provides ‘Big Data’ analysis and human behavior prediction software to marketing and advertising decision makers within companies, this morning announced that it has closed a $1.5 million funding round before going after a larger financing round in 2012.  The bridge funding was provided by Detroit Venture Partners and angel investors Bobby Yazdani, Joe Zawadzki and Doug Imbruce. Sociocast offers predictive modeling of human behavior based on analysis of huge data sets, enabling company like advertising technology vendors to gain real-time audience insights that help their own clients make effective marketing decisions. Sociocast’s flagship product, dubbed Connect, aims to help advertisers reach the right people at the right moment, based on where audiences are and where they are likely to go next. The company previously closed financing rounds in January 2010 and March 2011.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Busy schedules; mouths to feed; Angry Birds to play; another post by Rip Empson to read: There are thousands of distractions that get in the way of our regular exercise regimens, getting in shape, and improving our health. In fact, Americans spend over $50 billion each year on products and services designed to help lose weight, quit smoking, and to improve overall fitness.  From smart devices that track heart rates and sleep patterns to platforms that gameify your workout routines, entrepreneurs are looking for better and more effective ways to encourage people to get off the couch and take responsibility over their health.  HealthRally, a San Francisco-based social health startup in private beta, wants to help people reach their fitness goals by using one of the oldest tricks in the book: Financial incentives.  Yep, HealthRally is tying some basic behavioral economics, which show that financial incentives can triple one’s chance of reaching health goals, to a little bit of social networking in an attempt to create the ultimate way to stay healthy. To that end, the startup is taking a cue from Kickstarter and is building a crowdfunding platform through which users can share their health goals and have friends, family, and colleagues pitch in to create those real carrots-on-a-string that will keep them motivated. (Much like Fitango before it.) HealthRally is betting that with friends and family contributing financially to one’s fitness goals, that peer support will drive success rates through the roof. That’s why the startup enables users to assemble their friends and broadcast formal wellness commitments to those they care about, with the ability to manage the process as they work through their checkpoints. And there’s no better way to motivate people than with cold hard cash, holiday gift items, and the prospect of scorn from spouses and friends if they don’t meet their goals. In support of this social, crowdfunding approach, the startup is today announcing that it has raised over $400,000 in seed funding from prominent angel investors like Esther Dyson, Isy Goldwasser, Dick Sass, Ty Danco, and Jeff Thiel.  HealthRally has also assembled an advisory panel that includes researchers and entrepreneurs with significant experience in both behavioral economics and social networking, including Paul Zak, Director of The Center for Neuroeconomic Studies at Claremont University, Tom Valente of The Keck School of Medicine at USC, the former president of Healthiest You Denise Thomas, and SocialText Chairman and Co-founder, Ross Mayfield, among others. “Games and badges are great, but most people would rather have an iPad, a vacation, or cool new pair of shoes”, says HealthRally Co-founder and CEO Zack Lynch. With HealthRally combining financial incentives with social support from friends and loved ones, it may be on its way to unlocking an effective means by which to both motivate people to take action and sustain a higher level of fitness once they do. The startup isn’t saying much more on the specifics of its platform just yet, but it will be launching in public beta by the end of the year. So, more to come soon. To request an invitation, jog on over to their landing page.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some think Mark Cuban is a genius, some think he’s lucky. Either way, the guy has a knack for seeing value where others may not, for locating long-term investments, and for ending up on the right side of the deal. Some may disagree with his approach, but Mark Cuban is a billionaire, and while making money is a lot easier when you have stacks of it to play with, becoming a billionaire doesn’t happen by accident. (Lotto winners not included.) For those on the younger side who haven’t yet made their first billion, the investor’s early story should be comforting: After graduating from college, Cuban started his career (auspiciously enough) as a bartender. Next, he worked for a year as a salesman at a PC software retailer, making $18K in salary, before being fired for meeting with a new client to close a deal instead of opening the retail store.  He later founded MicroSolutions, a systems integrator and software reseller, but it wasn’t until eight years after grabbing his diploma that he sold his first business, which CompuServe acquired for $6 million in 1990. And then, a bit more famously, he founded a company based on his mutual love of college basketball and webcasting (Audionet), turned it into Broadcast.com, and sold it to Yahoo at the height of the dotcom boom for $5.9 billion in stock. Since then, he’s been involved in a number of projects, most notably helping build the Dallas Mavericks, a team in which he bought a majority stake back in 2000, into an annual playoff contender and Lebron-slaying NBA Champions in 2011.  He’s also become an increasingly active angel investor in tech startups over the last decade, (you can get a brief sense of the companies he’s invested in on his CrunchBase profile), and spends quite a bit of his time coaching young entrepreneurs.  So, seeing as he’s spent more than a few minutes growing businesses, investing in startups, and advising companies on how to grow, when to pivot, and how to make money (he even recently wrote a book on the subject), we took the opportunity to ask the investor a few questions on some topical issues facing the tech industry. Check out his responses below: There’s a big debate going on about whether startups are overvalued / overfunded … is there really a series A crunch and do you think this will end badly? It really depends on where you live. The approach to startups is far different in Silicon Valley than it is in the rest of the world. Valley startups start big. Everywhere else we take the lean, mean startup machine approach. The former could run into cyclical financing problems because their success is dependent on exits first and operational profitability second. If the IPO market shuts again, and foreign investment dries up, the capital for Valley startups could be impacted. As far as overfunding, it seems to me that the prevailing wisdom out West is that the only way to exit big is to start big. With that mindset there is no such thing as overfunding. But its not an approach I ever take. I’m funding multiple companies across the country every quarter. Trust me, none are overfunded. If they execute, they will get the cash they need. Do you think Groupon is overvalued? I like Groupon. Their valuation is whatever the market says it is. They can’t pay attention to that noise. They have to be relentless and focused on continuously adding value to their customers at the consumer and retail sides. If they can do it, they will laugh all the way to the bank. We’ve seen the rise of Pandora and a host of interesting web radio/music services, like Spotify, take off recently. Curious how you view these players both as an investor/advisor. Do you see potential for Amazon/Google Music/Spotify etc to supplant iTunes? It all comes down to licensing fees from the labels, both direct and statutory. One of my biggest professional mistakes at Broadcast.com was not fighting the DMCA harder. There are so many ridiculous and arbitrary limits that every music company has this as an overhang on their business. I also worry about patent trolls coming in and killing this business. As a guy who understands digital video better than most, what are some of the most interesting companies and trends there that you think we should be paying attention to? Just remember one thing: The future of TV is TV. Television is still the best alternative to boredom. If you look at all the internet video companies that try to complement TV, they are doing well. If you look at those trying to replace TV, they are sucking wind. I categorize Netflix as doing well and a complement. They made a big mistake, but they are still the big dog. Do you think Facebook has a chance to become the OS of the Internet? Or is social/friendsourcing really just in a bubble of its own? Right now they are the platform that counts. So yes they have a chance to be the end all, be all going forward. They have become the home page for many of us. That said, their mobile solutions as a platform suck. They are very vulnerable to someone coming along and making social built on mobile a far better and more engaging experience than Facebook currently is. And, what’s more, as a bonus for readers, Cuban has also agreed to answer a few of the “top” questions posted in the comment section of this post. The three that receive the most “likes” will be chosen, so ask your own questions and “like” away. Also, a word of warning: He won’t answer basketball related questions, so keep your inquiries focused on tech and business.  Part of the reason that the investor and Mavs owner has been in a question-answering mood lately is that one of the startups to which he plays both investor and advisor — JungleCents — recently launched a giveaway where the winner receives a free lunch with Cuban. Once users sign up for JungleCents’ newsletter, they can then tweet at the investor, asking him questions on whatever topics they choose, to which Cuban has been responding in kind.    The Mavs owner is a good guy, but obviously JungleCents’ model is one that Cuban sees great value in — enough so that he’s allowed the startup to leverage his own personal brand for promotional purposes. Of course, this is in his best interest, but how many investors agree to do that?  Cuban invested $1.5 million in JungleCents back October of last year and is joined by a board that includes Hollywood producer Peter Safran, Guy Kawasaki and Bill Reichert from Garage Ventures. The reason Cuban believes in this San Francisco-based startup? Aside from the fact that in less than a year the startup’s deals are reaching 2.2 million email addresses, publishers included, and the user sign-up rate has tripled over the last 3 months, the company is taking an alternative approach to daily deals.  JungleCents uses a lead generation model — similar to how airlines and travel companies like Orbitz pay sites like Kayak for bringing them new customers — to give publishers supplemental revenue streams. To do this, JungleCents accepts gift cards from companies instead of cash, then runs those as daily deals, which it offers as discounts. (You can read our initial coverage of the startup here.) In its recent partnership with men’s lifestyle magazine, AskMen, for example, the startup partnered with men’s merchandiser Bonobos to offer discounts on their products, which it then displayed both on JungleCents.com and AskMen.com. This allows readers of AskMen to take advantage of a deal that’s pertinent to the content of the magazine, without having to leave the site. Customers might pay $48 for a $100 voucher to spend at Bonobos, which users can cash in whenever they want — all at once, or over time. When I asked the owner what it was specifically that attracted him to JungleCents, he said: “I like the idea of white label deal solutions that allow sites to leverage their own traffic. The core competency of most websites is rarely if ever going to be to source deals. Junglecents can do it for them and take a share of the profits. It’s low overhead, lots of sweat equity so not a big cash investment, but with high leverage if they can match the right deals to highly trafficked sites”. There you have it.  Here are Cuban’s answers to some of the top questions asked. Check ’em out. Mitesh Bilimoria:What was the biggest mistake of your career and what did you learn from it? Professionally, it was not aggressively going after the MPAA and RIAA in negotiations for the DMCA.  Another mistake was not applying for patents. I personally think patents are for the most part worthless and don’t protect your business, but at Broadcast.com we did so many original and unique things in streaming, multicasting, uploading of content that now that the climate of litigation has changed, that portfolio would be worth a ton of money. Benjamin Walker:We all know about Broadcast.com, but what made MicroSolutions successful? We were one of the first 5 companies in the country to begin selling/installing/integrating local area networks. Long before anyone knew what they were. Andrew Platkin:Hey Mark, are you looking for an intern? The rules on unpaid internships are killer. It’s more hassle than it’s worth. Joe McMackin:If you were 22 again and didn’t have money, what industry would you launch your first startup in? I would start out by developing apps that allowed people to fine tune the wireless tech in their home. Best location for your wireless router. Testing connectivity between the two. Offering Siri like intelligence on what pieces should be integrated and how. Pat O’Brien:What is the best way to be approached by a company looking for funding? This would be if you don’t have major connections or if you wouldn’t be able to have a warm introduction… Email. Be to the point and tell me why what you have is different versus the competition, what you want from me, and what I get if I give it to you. Simple.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily App developers don’t exactly have a plethora of monetization options, which is why, alongside in-app purchases, they’re becoming increasingly reliant on mobile advertising. For this reason, they want to get the most out of their ads, and, really, they want to sell directly to customers. Unfortunately, for most small teams, this just isn’t in the cards. Which is where startups like Burstly enter the picture.  While there are plenty of mobile ad mediation solutions to choose from, Burstly CEO Evan Rifkin thinks that the current batch isn’t doing enough to empower developers to take complete control over monetization opportunities. For example, the startup offers a storefront for developers that enables them to establish their own branded portal where advertisers can directly purchase placements in their apps.  As to where the space is going, Rifkin says that developers want to control and manage all of their revenue channels from one dashboard so that they can have an apples to apples comparison of what brings in the most money, whether that’s ad networks, offer providers, cross-promotion, or direct sales. To further this goal, the startup is today launching Burstly Rewards, a product that mediates mobile offers both on iOS and Android.  Simply put, Rewards enables developers to mediate multiple providers within one wall, mixing in-house and direct campaigns and the ability to match the UI to their app’s look and feel, as well as support multiple offer types, whether they be videos, offers, downloads (Android only), and shares.  Burstly’s product aims to put the controls in the hands of developers so that they make immediate changes without having to make an SDK update — if they need to shut off a certain partner who isn’t in compliance, for example, they can do so quickly, or add new partners without updating their SDK.  The product has two essential components: The Rewards Wall, which allows app developers to mix and match third-party networks, in-house, and directly-sold offers in one place, along with selecting which providers (and the number of offers) to be displayed. Second is the Rewards Page, which allows them to run reward-driven campaigns through a customizable, branded page that fills the app’s entire screen. Users can access the Rewards page through custom buttons and/or banners throughout the apps. The idea behind these new products, and Burstly’s existing feature set is to try to give developers every conceivable monetization opportunity for their apps. As the ad mediation space evolves, Rifkin says that, rather than view others in the space as competitors, the startup is working to plug other players into their solution to do just that, for example, Smaato, Mobclix, Nexage, and MoPub are all on the list. With more coming soon. To support the launch of its new products, and further development to its Storefront offering, Burstly is today announcing that it has raised $5.5 million in series B financing from GRP Partners, Rincon Venture Partners, and SoftBank Capital. These existing investors were the main contributors to the company’s $1.8 million series A raise back in March of last year. The company’s total investment now stands at just north of $7.3 million.  Burstly Rewards is in beta starting today and developers can request to join. Rifkin says that the company will have several “well-known” titles launching with the Rewards product before the holidays. For more, check out Burstly at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Asana wants its task-list tool to feel so simple that you only encounter complexity when it’s useful. In other words, the opposite of how most enterprise software feels. And it has just added a little new piece of complexity in the form of a feature that lets you sync tasks to calendars. The result is that users have to make smarter decisions about which tasks matter most, which should end up helping their productivity. The feature looks obvious enough. A drop-down in the project menu lets you syndicate any task with a due date to apps like Apple iCal, Microsoft Outlook or Google Calendar. Select the sync option, and you can either click to add to Gcal, or click the URL to add to iCal, Outlook or other services. You can then use your calendar app to fine-tune things like how often you sync. But there’s more going on. The core interface lets you create projects for different sets of task lists, and within that, creating any task is as simple as hitting return on a project page then writing a few words. The date-creation option is purposefully buried in a window to the right of the list, that you need to click on to open. This means that if you create a calendar date for the task, it’ll be because date is going to be pretty important for whatever the task is. The importance of the date implies that you’re going to want to track it carefully.  The new calendar-syncing feature reinforces the value of adding dates by only letting you sync entire projects. Does any given task really matter enough to appear on your general calendar, or is it so nebulous that it shouldn’t even have a date? The end result is a better process for keeping track of what matters than just using a calendar. And there’s an added bonus for people like me who don’t think too highly of the date creation and task features in the calendar apps we use (by which I mean iCal’s frustrating new interface). Now I can see the dates for important tasks show up on my calendar without actually having to enter them.  There’s not much to complain about with Asana’s version, although I think it could use a little more complexity. The main thing I’d like is a way to schedule a specific task down to the minute and hour if necessary. Right now all tasks are just for the full day, so they’ll appear at the top of each day within calendar apps. For a few important tasks, the timing matters too much to gloss over. I’d also like a way to schedule some tasks to repeat by week or month. Latest headlines delivered to you daily All the world’s music and no way to figure out what to listen to next. This was the problem with Spotify until today. Its flimsy What’s New and Top Lists discovery channels showed you what’s popular, but there was no way to learn about artists or get recommendations from experts. And the radio feature? Ugh, it followed a great track by UK indie rockers The XX with a 10 year old Creed song. But during the launch of its app platform this morning in New York, Spotify unveiled new integrations that unlock the potential of its massive music catalogue. Last.fm contributes band biographies, Rolling Stone provides celebrity and editor playlists, and Songkick helps users find nearby concerts from their favorite bands. The apps could inspire longer listening sessions that expose users to more ads, get them more attached to their paid accounts, and share more links that drive referral traffic from Facebook. A core disadvantage of music on demand services is that they put the burden of choice on the listener. Unlike Pandora, which you can fire and forget, Spotify requires attention as users have to pick what to hear next when their current song, album, or playlists ends. If they’re not sure what to pick and are tired of the bands they already know, they can disengage. But the beauty of Spotify’s comprehensive catalogue and subscription model is that you can listen to anything, and you don’t have to pay for each additional song like with iTunes. This gives discovery on Spotify high potential and low cost, but users need guidance. Rather than try to convince them of its own expertise, Spotify has tapped trusted music services and publications to lead users to the promised band, err, land. Many of its partners are great standalone utilities to briefly checkout, but with Spotify they’ve found ways to gain longer exposure and build their own businesses. Meanwhile, Spotify creates more inroads to its service as partners promote their apps. Spotify’s new App Finder (access it here) helps users discover the apps in the first place. These HTML5 apps run within the Spotify desktop client using a Javascript API. Last.fm was a powerhouse in the days before legitimate streaming on demand. Its scrobbling plugins let users track their listening activity on iTunes, Spotify, and other players. With the launch of its app, listeners will no longer have to skip out to Wikipedia to find out how and where a band formed. Last.fm will leverage its rich music interest graph to create playlists for users based on their previous listening history. Rolling Stone will also contribute playlists, but these are handcrafted by the magazine’s editors and the artists themselves. Rolling Stone puts out a playlist issue each year, and inevitably someone collects the MP3s of each list and starts torrenting them to others. Rolling Stone’s Spotify app will make listening to Bono’s favorite David Bowie songs easier than piracy. There’s a debate over whether Spotify’s streaming royalties can financially support bands. I believe the key is using cheap or free listening to get people loving bands and then paying big bucks to go to their shows and buy their t-shirts. Songkick‘s new Concerts app for Spotify formalizes this flow, allowing users to discover and buy tickets for nearby shows by the bands they’re listening to. Songkick’s co-founder and CEO Ian Hogarth tells me “The average American goes to 1 concert a year. We want to get them to go to 5 shows a year.” Other partners that will be launching apps include TuneWiki, The Guardian, Dagbladet, Hunted, Soundrop, Top10, Billboard, Fuse, Gaffa, Pitchfork, ShareMyPlaylists, Tunigo, and Moodagent. Spotify seems to be following in Facebook’s footsteps. Rather than divert attention building niche functionality, it has opened a development platform so it can concentrate on the core product. Every music publication and startup should be thinking what they could do with access to Spotify’s library. Imagine playlists based on your location, Facebook Likes, or Twitter updates. Recommendation apps that pair music with your current mood or meal. Printed poster collages of your favorite bands. T-shirt suggestions. Hogarth tells me, “A ton of creativity was unleashed by the Facebook platform, by the iPhone platform. This is going make developers excited about music again.”  Latest headlines delivered to you daily With today’s launch of Startup Texas, Texas becomes the latest U.S. state to join the growing list of regions in the Startup America initiative. The Startup America national campaign, chaired by Steve Case, co-founder of AOL and Chairman of the Case Foundation, is meant to encourage and accelerate entrepreneurship across the country, especially in regions where it can benefit from a push, like Colorado, Illinois, Massachusetts, Tennessee, Connecticut and Florida, all of which are already program participants. The Austin Chamber of Commerce announced the launch of Startup Texas this morning, and says it will support the initiative through its own “Opportunity Austin” funding, which will help provide staff and resources to help Texas-based startups succeed. The partnership will also connect local entrepreneurs with sources of funding, service providers, advisors and mentors, accelerator programs, training, talent and customers. Texas has been on a roll this week, having also just seen an announcement for UT’s “Demo Day,” which will feature student startups emerging from the “1 Semester Startup (1SS)” class at the University of Texas at Austin. (The fall 2011 class is listed here). The state, and especially Austin, Texas, has already claimed its spot as an emerging startup hotbed, having been home to a number of high-profile companies, including Gowalla, Spiceworks and Bazaarvoice, to name just a few. Our own Crunchbase lists hundreds of companies in the Austin area alone, for example. Although the Startup America program is not without its own political controversy, for Texas entrepreneurs Startup TX can only help. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMayor Bloomberg on Hard WorkIn his final Founder Stories interview with host Chris Dixon, Mayor Bloomberg begins by offering advice to those wrestling with a career decision – becoming an entrepreneur or joining a bigger company. Having tasted both worlds, Mayor Bloomberg points out “big companies have more structure but you have a little more security. Small companies, a lot less structure but a lot higher payoff.” While he thinks transitioning from a bigger company to a smaller company is easier than the opposite, he notes “if you have a vision and want [to strike out on your own], do it.” He honestly admits however, “I don’t know whether I would have had the courage to go do it if I hadn’t gotten fired.” Speaking from first hand experience, the Mayor tosses another option into the mix – public service. Similar to the private sector, he believes “it’s hard work, it’s being willing to stand up for what you believe” but recognizes “the payoff isn’t in dollars, it’s in satisfaction.” It seems appropriate that success he’s had in these three sectors occurred in “The City That Never Sleeps. “I am not smarter than anybody else but I can out work you – and my key to success for you, or anybody else is make sure you are the first one in there every day and the last one to leave. Don’t ever take a lunch break or go to the bathroom, you keep working. You don’t ever know when that opportunity is going to come along.” He continues, “every opportunity I ever had, it was I think an awful lot of them was because I was there at the time. And that is the one thing you can control. You can’t control your luck, but the harder you work, the luckier you get.” Also important, “that drive to look at the bight side.” Adding, “there’s never been a day that I haven’t looked forward to going into work, even the days I knew I was going to get beaten-up, even the day I knew I was going to get fired – I’d never been fired before, I wonder what it is like, ok, let’s go find out.” Mayor Bloomberg shares many more personal insights during the interview. Make sure see them all by watching the entire video. Episode I is here. Episode II is here. Past Founder Stories episodes featuring leaders of Bump, Dropbox, MeetUp, Instagram and many other startups are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Less than a month after securing $500K from Founders Fund, health prediction service 100Plus has brought its funding up to $1.25 million. The new $750K in funding comes from Reid Hoffman and John Lilly via Greylock Partners’ Discovery Fund, Aydin Senkut of Felicis Ventures, and Ian Sobieski and Nicola Corzine via Band Of Angels’ Acorn Fund. The plan for the money? Developing the front and back end of the forthcoming 100Plus product so it can increase your lifespan. Co-founder Ryan Howard tells me the team is almost ready to launch its “crystal ball for your future, with insight into the 2 different versions of you — one that eats cheesecake for breakfast, and one that drinks a powershake.” Given the rate it’s taking funding and the quality of its investors, some see riches in 100Plus’ future. Howard is also the founder and CEO of free electronic medical records provider Practice Fusion. He says that startup’s goal is to help sick patients get better, while 100Plus is designed to prevent people from getting sick in the first place. Users log their diet, exercise, and other decisions, which 100Plus compares against its datasets from Practice Fusion, Health.gov, and the CDC. It then shows you the path your life will take given those decisions. That means showing you how you’ll get diabetes at 40 and die at 55 if you’re making poor choices, and how you could be bicycling with your grandkids if you improve. With the funding, 100Plus has hired design firm Cooper to create an elegant, beautiful user experience that takes advantages of all of the capabilities of iOS. It’s also hiring engineers, predicting its own growth and need for scalability. Next 100Plus plans to build out gamification elements, allowing you to compare scores privately or anonymously with friends, family, coworkers, or global averages. Howard tells me him and co-founder Chris Hogg want to “leverage the human ego to get the end user to live longer. Older people are going to love it because it lets them maximize their lifespan. College kids are going to love it because they’re competitive.” 100Plus also has enterprise prospects. Companies are interested in getting employees tracking their health and rewarding them with gym memberships and other healthy perks if they keep their score ups — and keep the company’s health insurance rates down. With multiple prospective revenue streams and booming interest in personal wellness, 100Plus looks like it has a healthy life ahead of it. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Proximiant just launched a new service that provides digital receipts to customers of brick-and-mortar merchants. Like Square, the service involves the use of a low-cost hardware dongle that’s given away for free. But unlike Square, Proximiant leverages NFC (near field communication) to send the receipt from the cash register to the mobile phone. NFC is a newer technology that ships in many modern mobile phones allowing for data exchanges over short distances. In Android 4.0, for example, NFC has been re-branded “Android Beam,” allowing users to share contacts, links, maps and more through a simple tap. In Proximiant’s case, the service uses NFC to send out digital copies of a store’s receipts to a customer’s phone, also with a tap. For non-NFC devices, like the iPhone, an NFC tag (a keychain tag) is provided instead. Merchants give these tags away for free to customers who then pair them with their own mobile phone. The Proximiant transceiver, a phone-sized device that plugs into a store’s computerized cash register via the USB port, will sit at the merchant’s checkout counter. The setup process take two minutes, the company claims. However, the device doesn’t integrate with POS systems. That’s by design, says Proximiant – it’s meant to support any software the merchant is using. Instead, the transceiver grabs the receipt data from the PC when a receipt is printed and sends it over a secure connection to the customer’s phone (upon tapping) as a digital image. A scannable barcode on the receipt allows the merchant to scan the phone itself in the event of a customer return or refund request, and the accompanying mobile app on the customer’s phone provides an archive of their transactions. For merchants, adoption is relatively painless. There’s no upfront service cost, the system is plug-and-play and the hardware is free. However, merchants are charged on a pay-by-sales model for results Proximiant achieves. The retailers can choose to leverage the system to market to their customers via the digital receipts. (Yep, no good mobile commerce app would be any good these days without offers, right?)  Proximiant supports various marketing efforts, promotions, referral programs and loyalty programs, without requiring customers to hand over personal info like their email address or phone number. Merchants manage the programs via an online interface. Meanwhile, customers can save coupons phones within the Proximiant mobile app (Android/iPhone), redeem coupons at checkout by showing a barcode, share the coupons via email, SMS and social networks, configure reminders based on time or location, and access their receipts via the Web or phone. The company is led by Fang Cheng (CEO), who previously co-founded Touchco, Inc., which was later acquired by a Fortune 100 company. Edwin Evans, who serves as VP of Engineering, co-found Quinly, a mobile app development shop, and worked on Motorola’s Android project and at Good Technology. Thomas Ahn previously worked for a network and data compression software startup, ViaSat. Rich Geruson, CEO of Phoenix Technologies and former SVP at Nokia, and Chung-Man Tam, now the entrepreneur-in-residence at Sequoia and formerly with Google, are serving as advisors. Proximiant is certainly an interesting idea – from a consumer’s standpoint, I’d love to have digital receipts without having to snap photos of them with apps like Lemon, Expensify, Shoeboxed, and others or provide inbox access as with Slice and OneReceipt. However, Proximiant’s real competition doesn’t come from other receipt organizers – it comes from services like Square, which is already well on its way to building a viable m-commerce platform without having to workaround the fact that not all phones have NFC. Having to use a keychain tag, as all iPhone users will need to do with Proximiant (unless Apple decides to join the NFC bandwagon with the iPhone 5), isn’t as simple as tapping your phone. Keychain tags fall off, keys get buried in purses and bags, and frankly, some people just hate the keychain clutter they cause. Meanwhile, a phone is almost always in a pocket or hand, easily accessible. Proximiant is fully self-funded and is currently running beta trials in a dozen stores in the San Francisco Bay area and Palo Alto. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Automated Insights, the venture-backed digital media company formerly known as StatSheet, automatically transforms data into content – think interactive applications and things like data-driven news articles, charts and whatnot. Lately, Automated Insights’s been making waves with its extensive network of sports-related websites. For an example, check out the StatSheet MLB website. Today, the company is debuting a website in an effort to showcase “all the cool stuff they are doing with Twitter”. Dubbed Stat.us (amusingly, the name @Jack Dorsey gave Twitter before it became Twitter), the new website aims to allow sports fans to follow just what they are interested in. The site was born partially out of frustration with Twitter’s limited filtering capabilities, Automated Insights founder Robbie Allen told me. Basically, Stat.us aggregates Twitter accounts for every NFL, NBA, MLB, NCAA Basketball and NCAA Football team in the United States, and populates them with live play-by-play updates, score updates, statistics and analysis.   Another cool part of Stat.us is the Twitter Fantasy Tracker, where users can create a Twitter list with the specific accounts from the players on their Fantasy football team. Here’s Allen’s list if you’d like to get a better idea of what Automated Insights is trying to do. At present, StatSheet’s Twitter network boasts over 250,000 followers, and Allen tells me Automated Insights has gathered over 2 billion relevant statistics in a proprietary database to date. The statistics for Stat.us are provided by StatSheet’s official stats provider, sports wire service The Sports Network.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startups pivot; it’s part of the process. But how many startups pivot multiple times and still manage to raise significant cash from reputable investors? Sure, maybe it’s a sign of a bubble, a sign that startups are indeed overfunded, or maybe this company is just getting better with each successive effort.  We first covered NewsCred back in 2008, when they launched a credibility rating score for publishers, authors, and stories (by way of community voting plus algorithms) in an attempt to help readers filter the noise and find the highest quality news.  Early last year, NewsCred relaunched as a “Ning for newspapers”, allowing users to build custom online newspapers in minutes. Both approaches seemed to hold water, and the startup raised $750K in seed funding from FLOODGATE and IA Ventures last September in support of it new look. However, neither model quite caught on, and the NewsCred of today has landed somewhere in the middle. Co-founder and CEO Shafqat Islam says that two years of iterating and nail-biting has led to the team deciding to ditch its consumer site, reprioritizing its focus on the simple (if not ambitious) goal of reinventing the concept of a newswire service.  To do so, NewsCred is licensing content from more than 700 premium media brands, like Bloomberg, Forbes, Guardian, WashPo, and The Economist, and charging customers to access its news API — and the premium content from those publishers. Hopefully, the third try is the charm. And, hey, quite a few reputable investors are willing to bet that it will be. Today, the startup announced that it has landed $4 million in series A funding led by FirstMark, with participation from Lerer Ventures, AOL Ventures and Advancit Capital, through Shari Redstone. (FLOODGATE and IA Ventures also reinvested.) It’s a vote of confidence for the startup’s mission to reinvent the newswire and, in so doing, connect audiences with “the world’s best journalism”, says Islam. In its new B2B approach, NewsCred is looking to provide publishers and brands with fully licensed, full-text articles, photos, and videos from international newspapers to blogs and indy rags. The startup’s in-house editorial team filters and curates thousands of articles for each of its clients’ specific needs and interests, whether broad or niche. Through one platform, one license, and one bill, NewsCred is endeavoring to make it a breeze for publishers and brands to buy, manage, and increase revenue. Along with its editorial team, the startup uses its API to filter and customize news articles by topic, location, language, sources, and date. Through its proprietary semantic and natural language processing technology, NewsCred curates 215K full-text articles from 700+ sources across 50 countries, in eight languages, all of which is organized into 20 categories, and 47K topics. Islam says that the startup’s tech is platform agnostic, working on tablets, mobile, the Web, Facebook, etc and delivers content, images, and multimedia in XML, RSS, or JSON. As to its revenue model? NewsCred chages a monthly API licensing fee to access its content, which is based on the volume of news stories as well as the sources licensed. All revenue received by the startup is then shared with content providers, and the CEO says that it is already paying some of its sources six-figures. For journalists, this can be a great way to gain exposure and access to new distribution channels, while maintaining attribution, and grabbing a supplemental paycheck. For publishers looking to up their production to keep up with the content-spewing 24-hour digital news cycle, NewsCred’s access to a huge array of voices and its ability to customize content and create targeted editorial sections for niche audiences — along with the complementary advertising opportunities — could be appealing. Especially for publishers already pulling in a high volume of pageviews.  It’s true that consumers want access to a variety of competing views when consuming their digital content, and NewsCred certainly gives content providers and brands an opportunity to access quality journalism and provide their readers with just that, but news consumers are also wary of plain old RSS feeds, aggregators, rebloggers, syndicators, and the ilk. NewsCred can sidestep this with a big editorial team and feverish curation, but it could be a slippery slope.  A one-stop platform for publishers and content producers to gain supplemental content and revenue streams is no doubt appealing, and may just be where this is all going. As long as it doesn’t require another pivot. For more, check ’em out at home here. What do you think? Is NewsCred onto something?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily As we reported yesterday, the market for mobile health apps is forecasted to quadruple to $400 million by 2016. The health tech space at large, too, is poised for serious growth over the next year, as medical devices and sensors get smarter, connect to the cloud, and now give us easy ways to track our health, fitness, and interact in realtime with providers.  Thankfully, the Web and digital technology are now playing an increasingly important role in the development of healthcare services (and the industry as a whole), so perhaps it shouldn’t come as a surprise that the professional networking model that has worked so well for LinkedIn is proving just as effective when applied to the sizable network of American physicians. Earlier this year, Jeff Tangney, Co-founder and Former President of NASDAQ-listed mobile health software applications maker, Epocrates, launched a new venture called Doximity. Taking a page out of LinkedIn’s book, Doximity gives physicians a private network through which to connect and collaborate on patient treatment or identify experts for patient referrals.  Doximity enables MD and DO professional networking on iPhones, iPads, Android devices, and the Web in an effort to connect physicians from just about anywhere. Why? Well, even though the cost of medical care is high, realtime communication between healthcare providers/physicians and patients just hasn’t existed at scale. Patients have their in-office time, are lucky if they can grab practitioners over the phone, but that’s about it.   That’s why startups like Jiff have found great reception in the healthtech community. Avado, too, is tackling this problem, developing a solution for healthcare providers to better manage their relationship with patients. And other than conferences, physicians don’t have a scaled, easy-to-use platform to connect with each other, network, find referrals, and provide faster, more effective treatments to their patients. Doctors are also, by and large, on the go — from the clinic to the lab, from the lab to the hospital, etc. That’s why a mobile (and Web) network like Doximity, which lets them connect via a private, secure platform is finding plenty of eager adopters. The startup announced today that over 30,000 physicians are now using its platform to collaborate, which translates to 5 percent of physicians in the U.S., says Tagney. For reference, that’s double the number of physicians using LinkedIn. The HIPAA-secure professional communication platform reached 30K physicians in just seven months (since it launched its network in beta), a feat that took LinkedIn more than three years to accomplish. Of course, Doximity is not the only player in the space; there are a number of anonymous physician chat services out there, like the sizable Sermo, which claims to be the largest online network exclusive to physicians.  It looks like Doximity may be poised to give Sermo a run for its money, especially as the platform is professional — in other words, it’s not anonymous — or accessible to the general public. Unlike the anonymous networks, physicians, general practitioners, specialists, nurse practitioners, and physician assistants all use their real names and verified credentials on Doximity in order to establish and share their professional expertise. Doximity also features a HIPAA-compliant SMS messaging system as well as the ability for physicians to securely fax directly from their mobile phone or computer to any physician in or ourside of the Doximity network.  The service is free to use, and is quick to set up. The platform creates a basic profile using data from public databases, which physicians can then add by uploading their CVs, etc., and then suggests connections based on location, work history, and educational background.  The startup raised $10.8 million in series A funding back in March. For more, check Doximity out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Jilion, the makers of the cloud-based HTML5 video player SublimeVideo, are today making the product more accessible through the introduction of a freemium offering. When the service launched earlier this spring, commercial plans were available, starting at the relatively affordable rate of under $10 per month. But when it comes to user adoption, nothing beats “free.” For those unfamiliar with the service, SublimeVideo offers a plugin-free Web player that uses HTML5 to display embedded videos publishers want to host online. When a user visits a site using an unsupported browser, the player provides a “fall back to Flash” mode that will play the video using Adobe Flash technology instead. When it launched commercially in March, the company admitted that it had struggled with its pricing plans, eventually settling on charging by volume as opposed to feature set. Today, that model has shifted a bit. All users will now have access to SublimeVideo’s new real-time video statistics platform which supports complete usage statistics for all platforms, including desktop, mobile, HTML5 and Flash. However, the level of access to that data will depend on the plan. The statistics are being made available through an online dashboard that shows a breakdown of video trends by the minute, hour, 24 hours, month and year. The live overview also offers details on all of a website’s videos, not just the per-video stats. Free users will only have access to these stats for the past 24 hours. On the Plus plan (now up to 200K plays/month), the statistics are retained for a year, while Premium plan (1M plays/month) customers will have access to unlimited data retention. Meanwhile, for enterprise users, custom integration of the SublimeVideo player and cloud technologies is also available. According to Jilion Co-founder Zeno Crivelli, the company saw over 10,000 sign-ups during its 6-month beta period, and a “good fraction” of those users converted to paid customers. However, Crivelli will not reveal the current number of paying customers or what companies and publishers are using the service. He does note that about half of SublimeVideo’s users are coming from the U.S. Clearly, the rollout of the freemium offering is meant to encourage more users to test out the service, and, if they find it useful, convert to upgraded plans. It may be a successful strategy. Although Jilion certainly isn’t the only video platform to offer an embeddable player that can intelligently switch between HTML5 and Flash, many of its competitors go the “free trial” route, not the “freemium” one. For example, there are currently similar solutions from companies like Brightcove, Ooyala, Kaltura and Yokto (to name just a few) on the market, but it’s free trials all around, not free service. That said, many of these established players offer a more robust feature set than what Jilion has made available today. To date, Jilion has raised $800,000 in seed funding from angels, family and friends. It also had consulting revenues to help out during the course of 2010, but those have stopped as the company focuses on building SublimeVideo. Crivelli say Jilion plans to raise a $2-$4 million Series A in early 2012. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over the last year, Foursquare has been actively buddying up with the daily deal players. Groupon, LivingSocial, Gilt City, AT&T Interactive, BuyWithMe and Zozi all provide their daily deals to Foursquare. And today, Atlanta-based Scoutmob joins the ranks of deal sites partnering with the check-in champion, as Foursquare will today begin offering Scoutmob’s 50 percent-plus discounted deals in 13 U.S. cities from the within Foursquare’s mobile apps. Foursquare CEO Dennis Crowley has said before that he thinks daily deal companies are version 1.0 of the tools merchants will eventually use to drive foot traffic to their stores. But, while daily deals are hot and companies are adopting them, there’s obviously no use in resisting. The more daily deal sites that Foursquare partners with, the more localized and nearby deals it can display to its mobile users. The next step, Crowley said, is for Foursquare to become focused on what has long been seen as Groupon’s weakness: Loyalty. Through badges and check-in specials, Foursquare is beginning to focus more aggressively on loyalty. And with the startup’s growing dataset that captures user check-ins, where they’ve been, what destinations they’re visiting most frequently, the key will be for Foursquare to let merchants access its data to segment their customers. As Erick has said in the past, to be successful Foursquare has to find a way “to close the redemption loop between an offer and a purchase”.   The new partnership with Scoutmob is a good move for Foursquare because users can redeem Scoutmob’s deals without ever leaving the Foursquare app. Scoutmob’s formula also means that no payment is required to find deals spontaneously (their deals are free), as Scoutmob doesn’t require a credit card or cash upfront, the user simply pays the merchant, and Scoutmob receives a flat payment once deals are redeemed.  For Scoutmob, which was founded last year and is still a relatively young player in the deals space, this is a big win, because it gives the startup a national platform. Through Foursquare’s some 10 million users, Scoutmob can now leverage that brand recognition to begin signing up more restaurants, which is the startup’s specialty. The startup’s editors offer users tips on what kinds of food to order at local restaurants, what owners to interact with, etc.  With Foursquare on iPhone, Android, Blackberry, and Windows, Scoutmob now has the opportunity to reach a whole new set of customers through each of the big mobile OSes, giving the local businesses they highlight a new shot at customer acquisition. For the Atlanta-based startup, which has some 800K users to date, this could be a great opportunity to increase brand awareness, expand their user base, and reach a whole new set of eyeballs. For more, see Scoutmob’s blog post here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Top social game developer Zynga has been widely expected to go public anytime… for months. But now we have a date range — mid-December, according to DealBook. That follows up on an earlier report today by Fortune that Zynga is starting a “road show” to prospective public investors on Monday to stir up interest ahead of the offering. An amended S-1 is also expected that day detailing the number and price of shares, as Inside Mobile Apps also hears. Finally, after months of media scrutiny about Zynga’s business and traffic (that the company has been legally prevented from responding to), and many a cancelled conference appearance by Zynga executives, public investors will get to decide what they really think. If Zynga is going to go public as it had said it intended to in its original S-1 filing this past June, the time is now. Macroeconomic conditions are especially uncertain due to big questions around how Europe is going to get out of its ongoing financial crisis. If the eurozone falls apart within the next few weeks or months (or days), investors are likely to have even less interest in a new-fangled type of tech company. Larger fears could be contributing to the poor recent performance of other recent tech IPOs, like Groupon, and Zynga now has to convince the world that it’s different in a good way. And obviously, how Zynga does could shape the perception around the forthcoming IPO of its main platform provider, Facebook. The good news for Zynga, on the revenue front, is that entertainment businesses (like video games) have tended to do well during tough economic times. People are willing to spend in part to get their mind off of employment problems, even if if doing so doesn’t make financial sense. As a significant proof point, the company can already demonstrate its massive growth across the span of The Great Recession. It also already shown increasing revenues in its S-1. At the same time, the company has shown declining traffic across many of its titles, and it needs to make sure new launches like CastleVille and the latest edition of Adventure World can bring it back up. Check out my story from Sunday for more on that. It’s also getting nailed for its aggressive culture, with a couple recent articles reviewing long-standing employee issues, and its struggles to land big-name acquisitions.  [Image via The Farmer’s Daughter. In case it wasn’t clear, an IPO “road show” is also sometimes called a “dog and pony show.”] Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile music discovery platform Shazam is reacquiring the intellectual property it sold to music royalty outfit Broadcast Music Inc. (BMI) back in 2005. At the time, the startup had sold the IP, which involves Shazam’s core audio recognition technology, in order to help fund its development. Given Shazam’s recent growth and expansion into other areas beyond music identification, now was the right time for the company to reacquire those rights, says Shazam CEO Andrew Fisher. Shazam made its debut as a clever app that could “listen” to the music playing on your radio in order to tell you what song was playing. However, in recent months, the company has been working on leveraging that same technology for use with TV advertising. In early November, the company also partnered with Delivery Agent, allowing you to “tag” (that’s Shazam lingo for “identify”) a TV show itself. The first studio to participate in this venture is NBCUniversal, which now lets you tag “Covert Affairs” episodes to discover the clothing and accessories worn by the TV characters as well as offer you an opportunity to buy related NBC merchandise. MTV and various advertisers are also on board with this aptly dubbed “Shazam for TV” initiative. By reacquiring its core technology, Shazam can integrate it more fully into its services, the company explained in a statement. This means not just the music ID service, but the TV ID services, too. Says CEO Andrew Fisher: “Shazam has seen fantastic growth in the last year, adding more than 1.5 million new people every week, with the total number of Shazamers around the globe now exceeding 165 million. This is the optimal time to repurchase the technology and patents so that we can continue to add to and protect our growing portfolio which will, in turn, allow Shazam to broaden our range of products, further developing Shazam for TV and other innovative offerings.” The price Shazam paid to buy back its IP was not disclosed. Under the agreement’s terms, Shazam will assume ownership of the IP while BMI will be able to still use the technology in the B2B sector to detect and identify performances of music through its BMI Recognition Services. BMI will also become a Shazam shareholder and the companies will work together on other co-marketing programs and service offerings in the future. The sale of IP may have helped Shazam get off the ground back in the early days, but the company has since turned to outside investment to raise additional capital. This summer, Shazam raised a huge $32 million round led by Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Institutional Venture Partners, with participation from DN Capital. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Automattic has teamed up with Federated Media to – finally – allow WordPress.com bloggers to make money from online advertising. The project is called WordAds and if you’re on WordPress.com you can express your interest for the program here. From the WordPress.com blog, including a fair bit of snark directed at Google: Over the years one of the most frequent requests on WordPress.com has been to allow bloggers to earn money from their blog through ads.  We’ve resisted advertising so far because most of it we had seen wasn’t terribly tasteful, and it seemed like Google’s AdSense was the state-of-the-art, which was sad.  You pour a lot of time and effort into your blog and you deserve better than AdSense. WordAds, which is optional, will let bloggers make money from their blogs by showing “high quality ads from brand advertisers” – this is where Federated Media will come in. Note that not every WordPress.com blog will be eligible for the program. According to the sign-up page, only publicly visible blogs with custom domains will be considered. Furthermore, selection will be based on “level of traffic and engagement, type of content, and language used on a blog”. Automattic’s Jon Burke also threw out an interesting stat in the blog post: apparently, more than 50,000 WordPress-powered blogs come online on a daily basis. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re going to waste your time playing games on Facebook, you might as well do it and help build a better world while you’re at it. That’s the promise, at least, of online entertainment company Sojo Studios, which is today debuting the preview of a Facebook game with a philanthropic twist called ‘WeTopia’. Backed by a former key Facebook employee, Path CEO Dave Morin, and Esther Dyson – both are on the advisory board – Sojo Studios wants to entice online gamers to play WeTopia in order to develop a better world for children, both on Facebook and in the real world. Here’s the pitch: As players build and grow their WeTopia villages and help their neighbors, they earn currency called “Joy” which they can apply toward real-world projects: whether food, healthcare, education or other programs assisting children, both in the U.S. and other nations.   Players can choose specific beneficiaries to receive their Joy and track their contributions through pictures, videos and in-game messages.   WeTopia is free to play – players can also buy Facebook credits to spend in-game – but everyone can have a real-world impact simply by earning and spending Joy through game play. Sojo Studios says it plans to make money through advertisers and sponsors as well as in-game purchases by players, with a mandate to donate 50 percent of the net profits (never less than 20 percent revenue) to its charity beneficiaries. The company has scored a “long-term, exclusive partnership” with talk show host Ellen DeGeneres and “The Ellen DeGeneres Show”. The celebrity will be using her reach to provide marketing support for the WeTopia game, but also “provide creative input into the design of future games” according to a press release. The company is also ‘affiliated’ with Warner Bros., but it’s unclear what that means, exactly. Among Sojo Studios’ initial nonprofit partners are Save the Children, buildOn and Children’s Health Fund. More on Venturebeat. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Here’s one for all you do-gooder Cyber Monday shoppers out there. “Doing good” and online shopping have traditionally been at odds. You know what your favorite brands are, where to find them online, and maybe you occasionally find yourself wanting to patronize the green, “ethical” equivalent of your favorite brands. Problem is, you have no idea where to find them, and you probably don’t care that much. Plus, search results don’t give you the price points or styles you want.  Well, Fashioning Change is developing a solution to this very problem. The San Diego-based startup is building a recommendation engine that takes information based on the big, well-known brands you love and introduces you to the “do-gooder” or “green” alternative. Today, that recommendation takes the form of a public marketplace (in beta) and a private beta browser add-on, which will be launching in early 2012. (But we have 100 free invites to test the add-on below.)  As to how it works? Fashioning Change lets shoppers select name brands, or filter based on certain products, at which point the recommendation engine serves eco-friendly and ethical alternatives, based on price point and style. The site also features a product called “Wear This, Not That”, which juxtaposes a name brand with a “green” brand, so that users can directly compare the look and price of the product, as well as compare the practices used by each company to manufacture the product. Each of these comparisons are interactive, as customers are able to view pictures of the products and make purchases directly from the pages, as well as embed the looks on their own site. For “eco-friendly” brands, Fashioning Change wants to be a platform that creates brand awareness by way of association and comparison, as well as providing details behind what makes their practices more eco-friendly and ethical than a comparable product or name brand. And, as the startup grows, it hopes to provide these brands with a global market through which they can acquire new customers and reach shoppers that are looking for an alternative to name brands.  The startup has built its recommendation engine using machine learning algorithms, so that as the platform grows, it takes activity and user preferences to fine-tune product-to-product recommendations, making for more accurate suggestions for individual shoppers. The startup was founded by Adriana Herrera and Kevin Ball. Herrera is a graduate of the San Diego Founders Institute, and Ball was one of the first five engineers at Causes.com.  As to the company’s Firefox add-on, the browser tool allows shoppers to receive realtime recommendations as they shop directly from 30 of the top name brand sites. And, like its web counterpart, the add-on provides access to the ethical practices used by the name brands whose sites users are surfing to compare with more eco-friendly products.  For readers looking to test out Fashioning Change’s Mozilla add-on, navigate over to the startup’s website here. The first 100 readers can use the “TechCrunch” access code to receive a free test run. Then report back and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily SlideShare, the content sharing platform for business documents, videos, and presentations, has grown into a sizable platform. In 2008, SlideShare was but a simple app launched on LinkedIn to allow professionals to share slides and documents with their network. As SlideShare is designed as a sharing platform for the professional community, its collaboration with LinkedIn has made perfect sense from a strategy standpoint — and has helped it grow into the juggernaut it is today. The startup has continued to work with LinkedIn to add deeper integration into its platform, which Leena covered in depth back in June. Today, SlideShare is apparently a force to be reckoned with, as the startup has created its first-ever infographic with the help of ColumnFive, which details its exponential growth. In fact, the graphic goes so far as to call SlideShare “The Quiet Giant Of Content Marketing”. What’s more, according to none other than SlideShare, SlideShare is now the largest professional content sharing community in the world. At 60 million unique visitors a month and 3 billion slides viewed per month, it has certainly attracted some traffic, and the hockeystick growth to be found in its visitors chart is impressive. LinkedIn, what say you?  But we think the most important take-away here is that 78 percent of SlideShare’s slideshows (PowerPoint presentations, slideshows, etc.) are under 30 slides, and the average number of slides is 19. So, when you’re building your next presentation that you want to go viral and to be shared with the world via SlideShare, make sure you keep it short. Otherwise, it’s a snooze fest, and we’ll all be throwing rotten vegetables at your slides. Content marketing is growing, and SlideShare is certainly aiming to be a significant player in that growth. But is it worthy of being called “The Quiet Giant Of Content Marketing”? You tell us. Infographic below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Hyperlocal is all the rage these days, and content companies, deal sites, and everyone in between are trying to find better ways to access (and advertise to) local markets. Over the last decade, the majority of media companies have attempted to launch internal or on-site outlets that cover local news, but most have met with middling success.  NearSay, a New York City-based startup that launched six months ago, began by asking a simple question: “Where do we get our neighborhood news?” NearSay’s founders, Trevor Sumner and David Pachter, were startled by the lackluster and confusing responses to that question and, in turn, the dearth of valuable neighborhood outlets for local news. So, for their answer, they started a platform that began as a realtime business newswire to allow local businesses in New York City to publish announcements (on events, deals, etc.) to the NearSay platform.  Now an aggressive publisher of neighborhood lifestyle news, the startup has partnered with small, local publications (where they exist) to allow local businesses to target their content to the people who can actually benefit from — and want to hear about — local news. To add to their platform, the startup launched LocalVox, which is (among other things) a white label advertorial publishing tool that allows niche publishers to syndicate their clients’ content across the startup’s network and blast that content out to social media outlets.  The idea was to create a Yellow Pages 3.0, which not only serves as a tool to help readers or searchers find telephone numbers or addresses of local merchants, but to actually help those merchants optimize their placement in search results and get found by the people who need them.  Today, the company is now calling itself LocalVox Media, and NearSay, its contextual newswire service, has become a feature of the platform. As a part of this rebranding, the startup is launching LocalVox 2.0, with which it is hoping to become a full, multichannel marketing tool for local businesses and publishers. The white label tool it launched initially was aimed at larger publishers which already had sales and customer service teams, but Version 2.0 makes the company a full-service solution for all publishers and local businesses. To date, the platform has attracted 270 clients which are using the service to publish company events, promotions, and community programs through NearSay’s network; so, with LocalVox 2.0, the startup is looking to become a full-service tool for its clients by integrating Google Local optimization and social media management services.  Leveraging Google Places and Google Plus, social media, email marketing and more to create a simple way for their clients to generate news and target new and existing customers, LocalVox wants to enable community businesses to attain optimized Google placements — all through an all-in-one marketing solution characterized by a user-friendly interface. This last bit has become increasingly important, as local marketing solutions are realizing that products that sound technical or rely too heavily on self-service models are failing to see the adoption among small merchants that many hoped they would have. Thus, LocalVox sees itself as a long-term marketing partner for its clients, not a quick fix. So, in contrast with Groupon’s model, which creates episodic bursts of activity and exposure for small businesses, LocalVox provides a searchable history of news content that lives on each business’ web page that is optimized for search engine placement and social media integration — all of which is intended to create additional exposure over time. Or looking at LocalVox in juxtaposition with Aol’s hyperlocal news outlet Patch, for example, LocalVox sees its value not as a destination site, but in leveraging programs that engage consumers across multiple channels and take the pain of managing search engine placement, social media, and multichannel marketing strategies out of the hands of the merchants themselves.  What’s more, local businesses often find difficulties in updating and maintaining their websites with relevant content, and making their sites into workable, valuable communication platforms. So LocalVox wants to help them, say, upload customer lists and avoid going to a third-party source to upload a newsletter. According to LocalVox Co-founder Trevor Sumner, it’s this approach that has led the startup to a 95 percent retention rate among participating businesses — compared to Groupon’s retention rate at 18 percent.  To date, the startup has raised a small angel round, but it is in the process of raising a series A round, Sumner says. Currently, LocalVox is only available in New York City, but the startup plans to expand into new markets beginning in early 2012. And, for TechCrunch readers interested in testing LocalVox 2.0, the company is offering five local NYC businesses a free month of social media strategy and implementation as well as a free month of Google Places optimization. The startup will select the businesses from those who send emails to LocalSales@LocalVox.com with “TechCrunch” in the subject line.  For more, check the startup out at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily LaunchNow.co is a new startup that turns building startups into a game. (Yes, we’re there now.) The idea is that players will pit their companies against each other in order to earn badges, achievements and a “Gamerscore” which is then published to their startup’s profile page. Oh, and here’s the crazy part: LaunchNow is meant to be used with real-life startups, not fake ones. To get started, players enter in some basic information about the startup they’re working on and are then given a set of goals they have to complete in order to enhance their company and earn badges. These achievements include things like product milestones (alpha, beta, etc.), investments, turning a profit, adding new hires and press mentions. (Score one for LaunchNow, I guess).  At its core, LaunchNow isn’t all that different from Klout, which measures an individual’s influence on social networks by doling out points. It’s just that on LaunchNow, startups are given points for other, arguably more important types of achievements than being a prolific twitterer or an early adopter of Google+. LaunchNow’s creator is Raymond Angel, the CEO of Guild Press, and the former CEO of amassed lust entertainment, MOSH mobile and the Interim CEO of Startup Weekend. Craig Crook, Co-founder of the New Media Cartel, helped create the idea for the company, which is operating now in a fully bootstrapped mode with just Angel at the helm. But who’s going to use this thing, I wonder? After all, if you have a great idea for a new startup, you don’t want to post it online where other entrepreneurs can read all the details, right? Angel says that’s true, so LaunchNow players can choose to keep their startup listed as “private” while they play, allowing it to remain in stealth mode. Given the explosion of new companies, the idea for a startup-ranking service isn’t an entirely bad one. But LaunchNow is no Klout. Klout’s evil genius is that it sucks in public data to perform the rankings automatically – you don’t even have to register for Klout to have a Klout profile. On LaunchNow, however, rankings are based on manual data entry. Seriously, if you’re a startup creator who’s more focused on your startup’s gamerscore, instead of, oh say, writing code, it may not matter how many badges you earn – you’re probably not going to win the real game: being an awesome company. LaunchNow is still very much a bare bones site, with tons of other features planned, including a startup feed, user profiles, forums, customizable URLs and more. Until it adds automation to that list, though, it’s hard to believe that any serious entrepreneur would stop what they’re building to play this game. LaunchNow is very much a sign of the times, where there’s so much opportunity and so much money, that some are approaching building a startup as a casual exercise, even a game, and not the very hard work it is supposed to be. At the end of the day, it’s not necessarily a bad thing to see the barrier to entry lowered – tomorrow’s casual one-off built by a developer scratching an itch could very well be the next big thing. And gamifying the whole ecosystem isn’t as crazy as it sounds, either. But as long as LaunchNow requires entrepreneurs to stop coding to play, it’s not likely to attract the right kind of folks to try the service. But then again, in today’s ecosystem, that may not matter. If LaunchNow now was playing its own game, it just a press mention, points and a badge. So throw some money at it, right?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The sheer number of new startups forming and getting funded these days is dizzying. It’s never been easier to start a company to harness new technologies and turn them into products. Traditional venture capital may not even be able to keep up with it. We are at the beginnings of what may very well become a Cambrian Explosion of startups, which will have implications well beyond the technology industry to the entire economy. We’ve spent the last 15 years building out the tethered web. The next 15 years will be about connecting the web, and the broader internet, to the physical world. And mobile is just the start. We will soon be able to shrink fully-functional computers into almost anything—mobile phones and tablets today, TVs, car dashboards, and wearable devices tomorrow. And they will all be connected to the network. The only limit to what can be done with these connected computing devices will be what entrepreneurs and engineers can dream up. The Cambrian Explosion is a useful metaphor. During the real Cambrian Explosion, of course, many new species were created. But how many of them thrived? How many quickly became extinct? It was a period of rapid evolution, with new species both emerging and dying off quickly. In the end, the world was better off from an evolutionary perspective, but not every new animal survived, just like every new startup won’t survive. Early evidence of this Cambrian Explosion is already showing itself. Last year, for instance, there were more than 1,100 seed/angel funding rounds, up from 855 in 2008, according to Crunchbase. That was a 33% increase in just two years, and 2011 looks like it will surpass 2010. Why are there so many more early stage startups? I believe there are two reasons. The barriers to creating a startup are falling away, and the market opportunities have never been greater. (This is tempered by the current global economic malaise, and serious concerns about how many of these early stage startups will make it past the seed stage, which I will address later on). Let’s talk about the lower barriers to startup creation. First, there is less capital required than ever before, while at the same time there is more capital available (at least for seed stage companies). The advent of cloud computing, open source software, and plug-and-play APIs for every web platform means that 3 coders can create a product for a few hundred thousand dollars instead of the few million it would have cost just ten years ago. They can start lean, learn from their early customers, and improve the product along the way. On the opportunity side, the potential online audience is bigger than it’s ever been before, with 2 billion people online, and even more of them are moving to mobile. The Internet is no longer just the desktop Web. It is apps for mobile phones and tablets which pull data from the internet but never launch a browser. It is connected devices like Jawbone’s Up bracelet that monitors your physical activity. And that is just scratching the surface. There are whole industries yet to be seriously touched by the Internet, but which could benefit from better information: health, education, transportation, energy consumption—to name just a few. The consumer internet has basically zero barriers to entry, which is why we see so much action there, but brave entrepreneurs are beginning to take the same principles and apply them elsewhere. In health, for instance, where there are regulatory requirements or in education, where institutions hold the keys to the kingdom, internet startups are beginning to make some serious headway. The internet is today’s steam engine. Anyone can tinker and build an app or a web business. The pace of innovation is similar to what was seen during the tail end of the industrial revolution in the late 1800s when anyone with a barn (the garage of its day) could apply steam engines to all sorts of practical uses, including machinery and vehicles. The barriers to experimentation were similarly low back then. But now the engine is the internet itself. Any product or service that is not connected to the internet is dead in the water. Today’s most productive machine is the computer. But that machine is increasingly useless if it is not connected. What is the first thing you do when you turn on your computer? Launch a browser or check your email. Imagine a Kindle Fire or iPad as a standalone device. You wouldn’t be able to download any apps, books, or movies. Tablets and smartphones are merely interfaces to the network. It’s not just that the network is the computer. The network is society, the market, and politics all rolled into one. We live our lives connected to the network at practically all times through various devices. What seems frivolous in one context (using mobile technologies to organize a night out with your friends) can literally overturn governments in another (the Green Revolution in Iran, which gave rise to the Arab Spring, used Bluetooth-connected phones as its basic organizing network). Mobile, social, and local technologies are having a much deeper impact across the world than being able to offer up local deals on your mobile phone. The internet is at its core an information network and a communications network. The ideal of better information, of perfect information, changes everything it touches. And while that creates new opportunities, it also creates new challenges. Every single industry, every single business that profits from information asymmetries, will be challenged. Technology is not a panacea. It might very well be eliminating jobs faster than it can replace them. Technology makes industries more efficient, yes, but that also means they need to employ fewer people. Just look at the data. Economic growth and employment growth used to go hand in hand, but now it appears as though they have been decoupled. Apple’s big new server farm in North Carolina, for example, employs only 50 people. The Cambrian Explosion not only created millions of new life forms, it eliminated many of the weaker species that preceded it. They just couldn’t compete. I believe we are going to see a similar phenomenon in the coming decades on the economic front. The question is not whether it will happen. It is what side of the evolutionary divide do you want to be on? Image via Ecology and Evolution Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in early 2009, I wrote about an Italian startup called BeeTV, which showcased some impressive TV recommendation technology. The goal was to sell that technology to telcos and cable operators, but this proved to be a very difficult task for a small, scrappy upstart. This led to BeeTV changing course and trying its hand at making consumer-focused products, like an iPad app for watching and sharing TV experiences with friends. They also secured more funding, bringing its total raised to over $10 million. Alas, this morning CEO Yaniv Solnik informed me that they’ve failed to gain significant traction with the new strategy, and that they’ve subsequently ran out of cash.  The company will be ceasing operations soon. Solnik also says BeeTV’s main co-founder unexpectedly passed away last year, and that his death was -understandably – a huge shock to everyone at the company. BeeTV will be shut down, but the company has put its assets up for sale; including a patented recommendation engine for TV and a consumer-focused social TV service that encompasses iPad, iPhone and Web clients. So maybe this isn’t the definitive end of the road for BeeTV. I told Solnik that this ‘failure’ means he can now move on to the next startup, and he quickly responded to me, saying that he can’t help it and that he will keep trying. Good. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Matrix Partners and WI Harper Group, a Chinese VC, this morning announced that they’ve pumped $12.5 million into SNS Plus, an international publisher and distributor of games with a focus on the Asian market. As of June 2011, the company has published more than 60 games on Facebook, and more than 15 games on other platforms such as Zingme, iOS, Friendster and more.  SNS Plus, which was founded in 2009, boasts offices in China, Taiwan, and Thailand.  Its specialty, the company says, is “bridging mainland game studios to overseas markets”. Related: Matrix Partners Closes $650M Funds To Invest More In China, India Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, Erick posted a video in which the founders of a stealth, San Francisco-based startup called Undrip spit some rhymes in an effort to raise seed funding for their new venture. Undrip, which is building a service to better filter your social networking streams (like Twitter) and let people consume media content without the noise, hoped to use their creative plea as a way to attract attention from top investors. They even created custom videos that they sent to individual investors, like Ron Conway. (See the video here.) Of course, as Erick pointed out, in an overfunded environment, startups are looking for ways to set themselves apart from the pack. I would say that their video, which includes a sexy red car (and also happens to be Getaround’s Tesla) and a catchy chorus to the tune of, “We need a angel, We need a ride”, is pretty spectacular. You have to hand it to the guys for being willing to stick their necks out. Not only that, but in a world of boring pitches (trust me, we’ve seen a few), this is music to the ears of the media and VCs. How do we know? Well, we’ve been pointed to a video response created by Detroit-based venture capital firm, Ludlow Ventures, which seems to prove that some investors are not only listening, they may just want in. You may (or may not) know the Detroit firm as an investor in startups like Hipster, Graphic.ly, Fundly, and FLUD, to name a few. (Here’s their portfolio for reference.) Jonathon Triest, who is the Co-founder of Ludlow Ventures and the moonwalking, rhyme-dropping emcee in the video above, said that he loves seeing entrepreneurs take creative approaches to pitching investors, and Undrip’s video spurred he and his team to respond in kind.  Knowing that Mick Hagen, the co-founder of Undrip, also happened to be a founder of Zinch, a college admissions matching service which blew up and sold to Chegg, Triest told me that he knew the team had chops — but it was, of course, the video prompted them to make a call. The entrepreneur-VC and friendly version of playing the dozens, clearly.  Triest said that his firm is looking to invest in startups with great founding teams; Ludlow is trying to focus on picking and choosing entrepreneurs who, as he says, “they know they could have a beer with.” He said that he expects early-stage startups to pivot several times early on, but if the founders seem like good people, who are passionate, have chops, and are willing to stick it out, then that startup may just have what it takes to get the stamp of approval.  “The money-side plays an important role in seeding startups with the kind of capital that can enable early growth”, he said, “but that’s only half of it. We have to start treating entrepreneurs with respect, because they’re the ones out there going for it”. To that end, Ludlow Ventures wants to work closely with entrepreneurs and be a part of their development all the way along the line (in other words, founder friendly); and sharing office space with Quicken Loans Founder and Cleveland Cavaliers Owner Dan Gilbert’s Detroit Venture Partners, with a roof-top view overlooking Comerica Park, being part of Ludlow’s brood has some perks. Triest said that he has been in talks with Undrip, which he hopes will lead to some future investment. Nothing has been signed at this point, but Undrip’s video certainly seems to have captured some attention. Of course, every early-stage VC firm claims they want to be “founder friendly”, but not every VC is willing to respond with the same kind of creative energy their startups try to exhibit on a daily basis. So props to this VC for getting into the studio and laying down some flow. A full list of the lyrics as well as Undrip’s original video follow below: Verse 1:Yo undrip is bumpin’Pumpin the volume like a tech Christian SlaterAnd we hear ya loud and clearYa need an angel we got them wingsLike our skulls full of red bull on private planesLets fly hands up to the sky like we scored the goalWith a Hockey stick projection of Gretzky proportionsAnd we’ve done our due diligence we’re ready to closeThere’s just one thing we need to knowIs undrip bout to go to the topSo preferred with the stockIf ya ain’t heard ludlow we ready to rockSo it’s ready or not here we comeAnd the mission is gettin’ that acquisition sonFrom the elevator pitchin to the elevator hittin’ the top floorAnd openin’ to penthouse parties with horres devourersAnd scores of angel investors, prepared for bidding warsUnlockin’ that flow and so much more Chorus:We need a angel, We need a rideWe need a bump, a bump so we flyWe’re gonna make that money off of social steamBut we need your help to reach the dreamWe need a angel, We need a rideWe need a bump a bump so we flyUndrip is about to goWe just need an angel to unlock the flow Verse 2:Comin’ straight out of detroit, so our wings are redBut they’ll fly just the same, and your dreams in bedWill be reality instead because we livin’ it upDroppin that cold hard currency on companiesThey bout to start callin’ us green gravityYou write code, we write checks that let your grand story unfoldAnd when it’s all said and told from the premoney valuationTo the exit strategy the numbers look amazinOnly thing missin is chapter 11 but trust that’s all by designAs long as you can design and program well put grands in yo handsPlant seeds in this round and we’ll watch them growOh to big money trees so check the equity nowAnd you’ll see how ludlow gets downLudlow, LudlowBaddest angels around Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, Yandex, one of biggest search and advertising companies in Russia, announced that it would be teaming up with Microsoft, Nokia, HTC and Samsung to become the default search engine on both new and upcoming Windows Phones in Russia. This followed the news last month that Yandex is also set to become the search provider for bada-powered smartphones in Russia and the CIS. It’s been a good last few months for Yandex, as Robin pointed out last week, the company has steadily grown its share of the Russian search market to a point where it now owns 62.7 percent of the market in Q3 2011 — ahead of Google. Today, the Russian search giant has announced another strategic move in its mobile strategy, as it has acquired SPB Software, a developer of mobile software that makes its home in Russia, Taiwan, and Thailand. As for the price, sources close to the deal say that it was set at approximately $38 million. SPB was founded in 1999 and was originally focused on making applications and software for Android and Windows mobile devices, from games to productivity apps, but has since become cross-platform, and today offers a more robust suite of mobile solutions. These products include a mobile wallet, data traffic analytics, games, web TV integration, a mobile UI builder, etc.  But, according to Yandex Spokesman Ochir Mandzhikov, what was particularly of interest was the company’s new mobile UI engine for both smartphones and tablets, especially SPB’s “Shell 3D” product, which will be used to integrate Yandex’s cloud services and technologies. This is an important play for Yandex because it allows the company to integrate their search and ad services into a UI which can then be distributed across a multitude of mobile platforms. What’s more, using SPB’s mobile UI builder and toolset, OEMS and brands can customize skins, layout, widgets and 3D animation.  For more on SPB, visit them at home, and for more on SPB Shell 3D, check out the video below:   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Like putting a donk on it, it seems like every new website needs to have a daily deal. Take Curisma, for example. On the surface it’s sort of an Oink-like website dedicated to the curation of cool products. Underneath, like a the cowbell in Don’t Fear The Reaper, is a weekly deals site. Luckily, the curation of Curisma is far more interesting than the deal, which just might save this start-up. Founded by MIT students Fatma Yalcin and Eugene Gorelik, the site allows you to post stuff with a link to said stuff. Like watches? Post up a watch. Like a fancy lamp? Put that sucker up there. Presumably, over time, the database will burst at the seams, creating a Katamari-like wunderkammer. Right now it’s kind of barren. The money is to come from sales through the site – hence the deals – and through affiliate sales with associated objects therein curated. There is also a rating system for folks to rise to the top of the curating ladder, allowing for the cream to rise to the top.  Does the world need another Oink (or Blippy, for that matter?)? I’m going to withhold my judgement, but the design here is clean and clever and I could see the potential value to folks looking for a clever gift for the man or woman who has everything. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDavid Lieb’s Advice for FoundersBump co-founder, David Lieb launched an app that’s secured roughly $20 million in funding and has been downloaded approximately 60-million times. In his final Founder Stories interview with host Chris Dixon, Lieb predicts the next hot sector, discusses hiring employees and dishes out advice for future founders. When asked by Dixon to name his favorite “mobile apps” Lieb responds he is a big fan of “realtime information” and lists Twitter and Facebook as top picks. He continues by saying that approximately “5 billon” smartphones are expected to be in service within the next few years and believes that, “the next wave of really important companies will be mobile first.” Later in the interview Lieb tells Dixon that hiring talent hasn’t been an issue for his team and admits that while some workers may have gotten away, “It turns out the people you really want to hire, find you.” He wraps by saying that he’s seen too many founders suffer from “analysis paralysis” and urges entrepreneurs to “stop thinking and just go build it.” Recognizing that if his team had overanalyzed Bump, it never would have gotten off the ground. Make sure to watch the entire interview for additional insights, including Lieb’s take on how founders can help separate themselves from the pack. Here are episodes I and II of this interview. Past Founder Stories shows featuring Dustin Moskovitz, Eric Ries and many other leaders are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Classify this as a rumor for now, but Israeli business press is reporting that Akamai is poised to take over one of its competitors, website and mobile acceleration technology vendor Cotendo, for $300 million to $350 million. Founded in 2008, Cotendo has raised over $36 million in funding from investors like Sequoia Capital, Benchmark Capital and Tenaya Capital. A few months ago, Cotendo raised $17 million in new funding from its previous backers, with Citrix Systems and Juniper Networks stepping in as strategic investors as well. Other strategic partners include Google, AT&T and Sumitomo Corporation. The company specializes in acceleration services for dynamic Web apps, static and dynamic web content, performance monitoring and automatic failover as well as real-time reporting and analytics. Obviously, Akamai also provides such services to its clients, but is much bigger than Cotendo. On an interesting sidenote: a year ago, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology joined Akamai in suing Cotendo over patent infringement. Cotendo is headquartered in Silicon Valley with R&D facilities near Netanya, in Israel. Its three co-founders are Commtouch Software veterans. According to Globes, Cotendo customers include Zynga, Vistaprint and Facebook. The company’s advisory board includes Jonathan Heiliger, currently VP of Technical Operations at Facebook. Latest headlines delivered to you daily On Thanksgiving, Pinterest’s co-founder Ben Silbermann sent an email to his entire user base saying thanks. It was fitting, as Pinterest was born two years ago on Thanksgiving day 2009.  Ben had been working on a website with a few friends, and his girlfriend came up with the name while they were watching TV. Pinterest officially launched to the world 4 months later. Some startups go crazy with hype and users right after launch. And some don’t. I don’t know the founders, but I thought I’d take apart Pinterest’s story to discuss growth and virality in consumer web startups. Pinterest was not an overnight success. On the contrary, its growth was surprisingly modest after Turkey Day 2009. Take a look at Pinterest’s one-year traffic on Compete from Oct 2010 to Oct 2011, which is the picture in this post, and shows Pinterest rising from 40,000 to 3.2 million monthly unique visitors. I took both ends of this chart and estimated monthly compounded growth over Pinterest’s lifetime, then interpolated the curve using constant growth and put the results in this Google Spreadsheet. Backing out of Compete’s numbers, we see Pinterest grew about 50% month over month from a base of zero since its inception (on average, smoothing the curve). Today growth is catching fire, as evidenced by the near doubling of traffic last month, and Pinterest’s page views growing 20X since June, according to comScore. Note these numbers are approximations and also do not count the significant traffic the service sees from mobile (Pinterest’s app currently takes the #6 social spot in the iTunes store). Also my guess is that a lot of its unique visitors arrive out of network (from Facebook / Twitter), and many of these uniques leave Pinterest without registering (more on this below) so it’s tough to know their exact user numbers. But let’s play pretend and use the data we have to do some projections on where Pinterest could be a year from today.  Its recent VCs certainly did this, and decided to give the startup a $200M+ valuation.  Ron Conway said recently that Pinterest is growing like Facebook did in 2006. Facebook actually grew from 14 million uniques to 26 million uniques from May 2006 to May 2007, then a year and half later they had rocketed to 140 million uniques, and were growing at about 20 million uniques per month. So monthly growth early on for Facebook was around 10-15%. Can Pinterest really sustain its wild 45% monthly growth? No, unless it’s destined to be the fastest growing startup in history. However, we can be pretty sure Pinterest has hit a tipping point… their page view numbers are simply insane. If they were to grow 20% month/month over the next year, Pinterest would be at 30 million uniques a year from today. And with 25% month/month growth, they’d be at 50 million.  These are pure guesses, but Ron’s statements and last month’s growth make this look possible, so let’s examine virality and Pinterest’s underlying fundamentals. Virality – Does My Startup Really Need It? Viral sharing is typically emphasized in products or services where the cost to acquire a customer needs to be low, and you can’t afford to spend money on paid channels, like Mint.com did, or like a Living Social / Groupon.  Having a free method, ideally a user-driven method, is critical to consumer web startups. But there’s a lot of confusion around virality. The reality is that you can build a sustainable business without “going viral” and this point is not understood well among techies or investors. The connotation “going viral” typically means having a viral growth coefficient of greater than 1. For every user that comes on your platform, he or she refers 1 additional user. This ensures a service will “hockey stick”. But what if every user only refers, say 0.2 new users? Contrary to popular belief, this can also lead to a sustainable business. However, the lack of pure virality implies that you absolutely must retain existing users to grow. This is why daily active users and monthly active users are such important metrics, and are tracked maniacally by CEOs and investors. Churn is your ultimate enemy. Sure, it will take longer to grow if each user brings in fewer new people, but as long as most users don’t leave, you’re all good. Viral cycle times also factor in – the shorter the “referrer” period, the faster the virality takes hold – for example, if a user invites 1 new user every month, that’s better than if she invites 1 per year. Social games like Zynga historically have extremely short viral cycles; however they must, because churn is extremely high (user lifetime is often measured in hours or days, because users get bored with games quickly and move on). Obviously, the more viral a service, the more sustainable it is, but it’s really in the details. And overnight success is not a guarantee for sustainability. Many startups are pushing way too prematurely on press before they’ve demonstrated real sustainability. I see this all the time and Eric Ries covered this in his discussion on the danger of vanity metrics. The truth is that startups often draft off of artificial success that originates simply from hype within the tech echo-chamber. Some sites go from 0 to 100K+ visitors in weeks and people high five one other, then look around and say “what’s next,  how do we keep these users happy?” Pinterest’s Virality and Sharing Examined Pinterest’s story is much different – they didn’t have the same early “hype spikes” as many other startups do, standing at only 40K uniques 8 months after launch! It took Pinterest quite a while for a network-effect to take hold. Clearly every startup should hope for early virality. But if it doesn’t exist initially, you must work to perfect a soft onboarding of virality that’s based on high engagement, and create a product that people love and will come back to, while layering viral techniques on top of that. Today, Pinterest is clearly insanely addictive among its user base, and they are sharing.  But one reason I see Pinterest as a valuable a case study is precisely because they didn’t experience the early adopter “hype” spike 18 months ago. Like many tech startups, I am sure some content was seeded within the tech community by the founders. But their “normal” user was a housewife in the Midwest, not a techie reading TechCrunch or Hacker News. And I’m sure Pinterest made a bunch of product tweaks early on to iterate around sharing and engagement, as virality took hold. Let’s compare Pinterest to Instagram for a minute, since both base off of photo content as their primary unit. Instagram has actually done nearly all its user acquisition virally out of network (sharing to Facebook and Twitter) and via word of mouth, with limited sharing in the network. This is remarkable when you think about it.  By that I mean that there’s no real sharing inside the network other than liked photos surfacing due to popularity, and manual discovery via hashtags. There is no “regram” if you will. You also can’t follow people or like a photo from Instagram without an iPhone (even if it’s tweeted or posted to the web!) unless you’re a power user on an API mashup (see Inkstagram). All this reveals just how impressive Instagram’s growth has been, as they went from about 1 million to 10 million users over the past year. Being realistic, Pinterest could have much higher growth than Instagram based on the fact that it’s unconstrained as a platform – it works from web, mobile web, in-app, and has easier baked-in virality around sharing. “Pinning” has this built in because many initial pins start as “repins” of other people’s content. In this way, existing content will often be the seed for a new user’s stream. The pin unit is genius. Users can also visit the Pinterest site and participate (i.e. browse endlessly) before signing up. This allows full consumptive access before registering and is a secret weapon if done right. Fred Wilson discussed this recently in his post about the logged out user, giving an example of his mom checking his tweet stream without logging into Twitter – she gets value out of the service while ironically bringing down Twitter’s monthly active user metric. Similar value can be granted to consumptive users who visit the site but don’t initially register. Then when a user is ready to pin content, they create an account and go wild – Pinterest leverages web content from Tumblr like no site that has ever existed, thus riding on top of its network-effect while not requiring user generated content like many services. They’ve also perfected in-network virality (pin, repin, like) in addition to out of network sharing (Facebook, Twitter) to grow virally. For these reasons Pinterest could conceivably grow as fast as any consumer service we have seen in recent memory. It’s fun to speculate on all this when you factor in Ron Conway’s statements comparing growth to Facebook’s early heydays. And perhaps most notably, though it will surely take a while, Pinterest is already threatening to monetize, as those Midwest housewives are literally using it for shopping discovery, which Pinterest can profit off of by taking attribution for purchases that originate off its platform. I know several friends who’ve purchased stuff spontaneously via random discovery on the site. I expect Pinterest to be thriving a year from now (my guess is 30 million users next Thanksgiving) and also spawn hundreds of copycat startups in other verticals (“Pinterest for that”). Sadly, many of these will arrive on TechCrunch and spike in hype, then fail to nail any true virality before they are slowly forgotten… After all, this is the cycle of consumer startups. _________________________ Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBump’s David Lieb on Solving ProblemsSeeking a way to reduce friction while exchanging contact information, David Lieb and his two co-founders launched Bump – a service that allows users to swap everything from calendar events to music samples by simply tapping their smartphones together. In part II of his Founder Stories interview with host Chris Dixon, Lieb tells Dixon the big picture plan. “There is a lot of time spent figuring out how I interface with this [smartphone] to go access the virtual world, but nobody has really spent a lot of time thinking … how do I want to interact with other people and things in the real world, and that is the problem that we want to solve, we want to build that new UI layer for the real world.” Prior to making this point, Lieb and Dixon discuss Bump’s decision to allow companies like PayPal (and hundreds of others) to embed its code into their apps. While this would seem to be a big opportunity for Bump, Lieb notes, “as it turns out, our growth has been so rapid that our app just dwarfs any of these other apps that use our API.” Regarding PayPal specifically, Lieb says, “last time I checked I think there were like 10-million installs, maybe, so we have 6-times that.” Helping Bump hit that 60-million mark were Sequoia Capital who led a Series A round and Andreessen Horowitz who led a $16 million Series B round. Having steered the company though such growth, Lieb says managing emotions is still a bit tricky. “There are definitely days where I am like wow, we are just killing it, this is awesome and then 18 hours later, someone says something or we get some new information and we are like, ah man, we are totally screwed, and usually the answer is somewhere in the middle.” Make sure to watch the entire video of additional insights, along with episode I here. Past episodes of Founder Stories, featuring Drew Houston, Eric Ries, Kevin O’Connor, Christopher Poole and other leaders are here. Episode III of Lieb’s interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Omar Koudsi is a co-founder and CEO of Amman, Jordan-based Jeeran, the largest review site in the Middle East and North Africa. You can follow him on twitter here @omarfk On my way to attending an Endeavor Summit this summer, I had the following conversation with a customs officer upon arriving in the U.S.:  Immigration officer: What do you do for a living?Me: I work at a startup, and I’m here to meet people from my industry.Immigration officer: Ok. How long have you been at your current job?Me: We started around five years ago.Immigration officer: Five years! And you still call yourself a startup?!This interaction has stayed with me because it seems to me to be a great example of the discrepancy between the reality distortion field that is Silicon Valley — and the reality almost everywhere else. Even the immigration officer at the San Francisco airport was of the opinion that five years is too long for a company to consider itself startup. Being from Jordan and having visited Silicon Valley on a number of occasions, this visit (along with others) continue to show how the realities of the Valley stand in stark contrast with what an emerging world founder, particularly in the Middle East and North Africa, face to start and scale a Web business. I believe the lack of a well-developed ecosystem (funding, mentoring, risk culture, lawyers, human resources) puts the burden tenfold on the entrepreneur in the emerging world. In many cases, foreign entrepreneurs have to do ten times the lifting of an American startup — for a much longer period of time to boot — in order to succeed. My company (Jeeran) was lucky to find a VC firm called IV Holdings that had emerged in 2006 — way before entrepreneurship became cool in our part of the world — and it changed everything. Of course, it still took us a whole year to close our first round of funding, and really, throughout that period, there wasn’t any negotiation of terms — it was all just pushing papers.   In the Middle East, few had done this kind of transaction before; we (founders, VC partners, lawyers, gov. departments) were all flying by the seats of our pants, figuring things out as they happened. Not to mention, before we were able to find a VC firm and secure our first round of funding, we had worked full-time on Jeeran for a full three years, bootstrapping, relying on what revenue we created, and additional generosity from our mom/brother/cousin investors. This is true for the majority of startups in the region. But, back to my trip to Silicon Valley: I attended a workshop at Stanford University given by a well-known human resources expert on the best ways for startups to find top tier talent. One of the tips he gave us was to interview at least 10 people for each position before choosing the right candidate — to take your time and be selective.  I found it humorous, since we barely find a handful of people with enough expertise to make a difference, let alone 10 people lined for the database, UX, and product management jobs we (and so many others) are hiring for. Founders in the emerging world are mostly occupied with building-up talent as it comes along in bits and pieces, not recruiting it. Like most startups, we wanted our team to feel ownership over what we were building, so we sought to create a stock option pool. We worked with the top lawyers in the region and it took us around eight months to have it ready. In the valley, I got the feedback that such paper work (term sheets, share holder agreements, etc) are template-based and get pushed along by administrative assistants.   Some of this much-sought-after legal framework is so popular they get published on Techcrunch! Of course, I forwarded this link to our legal counsel who found it quite useful. I found it comforting that many founders in Europe and even the East Coast complain about many of the same issues: Lack of venture funding, lack of talent, and an ecosystem that penalizes risk takers. Of course, this situation has much improved for them and for us, but it made me feel less lonely when I hear tales of East Coast founders trying to convince Wall Street talent to join a startup. We still lack that kind of talent pool (thankfully I guess, right?) to recruit from, but clearly the cultural challenge of jumping ship to a startup is shared. My team and I will continue to make pilgrimage to the valley and soak in experiences. We will happily put up with the mocking of how long it takes startups to shift to second gear for us to learn as much as we can. However, here is an invite for the Valley to go out and see how the startups of the world are solving problems in ecosystems void of the many resources taken for granted by the Y Combinator-accelerated generation. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBump’s David Lieb on Luck and GrowthIf you find traditional methods of exchanging contact information a bit lacking, Bump offers an updated alternative. Bump is an app that allows users to automatically exchange contact information—along with photos and other items—after bumping fists with smartphones in hand. Although it seems like the information passes between the phones, the trick is that it actually goes up to the cloud after being triggered by the phone’s accelerometer. In his first Founder Stories interview with host Chris Dixon, Bump co-founder and CEO, David Lieb relates how he conceived the idea for Bump one week into business school at the University of Chicago. He met co-founder, Jake Mintz at the same time and along with their third co-founder, Andy Huibers began building on “nights and weekends” during “the fall of 2008.” By spring of 2009 Bump launched, and has since been downloaded more than 60-million times, he says, with 10 to 12 million active users in the last 30 days. Lieb admits his team caught a lucky break during Bump’s early days of attracting users. “We were the billionth app [downloaded] and that got us kind of promoted by Apple.” It “started this word of mouth distribution engine that just won’t stop.” He goes on to say that “70% of our downloads come from direct word of mouth.” The company has “spent a total of $42 on marketing.” Make sure to watch the entire video to hear additional insights, including Lieb’s pointed views on viral marketing and why he fled corporate America. Past interviews of Founder Stories featuring David Karp, Fred Wilson, Mike McCue, Laren Leto and many other leaders are here. Episode II of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Banksy fans, this one’s for you. Imagine an iOS photo app that swaps out Instagram filters for stencils from your favorite meme or art piece, then add a little augmented reality, and you’ll get Look. Built by a couple of the developers behind Sports+ as a side project earlier this month, it’s the latest mobile app to use simple photo-editing and social features to make the world around you more interesting. After downloading Look for the first time, you log in with Facebook, then see a camera view with the “Look” stencil overlayed on it. You can then switch to new stencils, available in the first folder at the bottom of the screen, that include the Pepper Spraying Cop, Charlie Sheen’s “Winning!” and a moustache for enhancing photos of your friends. If you want to unlock more stencils (at the price of $0.99 a pop), you can choose from sets of categories like birds based on Portlandia’s “put a bird on it” sketch, various wildlife, movie stars, vehicles, etc…. Or you can make your own: take a photo in its stencil creation view, touch it up, then set it as your stencil and shoot away. Once you take a photo, you can adjust the color of the stencil and decide if you want to share it on Facebook or with friends or nearby users on the service. Shared photos appear in a reverse-chronological stream like in Instagram, and include location and time information, as well as the option to vote up the ones you like most. Although Look has begun as a fun side project to leverage existing code, it could have a lot of features in store: a gallery for the images that get the top votes, other sign-on and sharing services besides Facebook, and ways to share and sell your stencils to other users. They’re also planning an augmented reality view, moving beyond the current photo stream to show you other user’s stencils as you walk around. The stencil marketplace, combined with augmented reality, could be an especially powerful way for people to discover great new photos and make some money. And yes, Android users, a version is coming for you, too. Here are a few images from when I got carried away testing it: Don’t Think Different.  Black Helicopter Spotted Over DC.  Hi Honey, I Painted A Stencil Of Me Taking A Phone Photo Of Myself For You. Do You Like It?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s certainly no shortage of social media monitoring and analytics service providers out there, with companies like Radian6, Visible Technologies, Sysomos, Socialbakers and Buddy Media among those who get most of the attention. But the market remains young, and there are lots of opportunities for small startups still. This morning, I sat down with Folke Lemaitre, co-founder and CEO of Engagor, to see how their offering stacks up against that of its competitors. A bootstrapped startup, Engagor has managed to deliver a product that can definitely compete on features, pricing and overall user experience. In essence, Engagor enables organizations to monitor and analyze what’s being said about their company, brand(s), competitors and whatnot on social networks, news sites, blogs and forums. Apart from tracking what’s being said across social media services, the Engagor platform also enables individuals and teams to respond to and engage with the people who are saying it. The product is designed to cater to multiple people within an organization handling consumer outreach and support, enabling them to assign tasks, tag conversations, perform sentiment analysis and identify influencers across demographics, and publish across multiple networks and profiles. Engagor serves companies of all sizes, but currently its pricing suits medium-sized and large enterprises best. Lemaitre tells me there will be more options for small businesses to make use of Engagor’s platform at a reasonable price in the near future. Also in the works: platform enhancements that will enable companies to identify and proactively reach out to potential customers using a wide variety of social media services. All in all, Engagor is a very powerful, well-designed online software suite for monitoring conversations across social networks, and a useful tool for companies to take part in online conversations. Lemaitre says they’re already cashflow profitable and looking for seed funding to accelerate growth. There’s a 10-day free trial if you’d like to try out the service, but if you sign up here and put “TECHCRUNCH” in the ‘message’ field you’ll get a full month free of charge.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Looking for a last-minute holiday gift? How about that Groupon you never used? Daily deal vouchers wouldn’t actually make bad presents if there was a way to gift them that didn’t involve an email printout tucked into a card. That’s where Presentify.me, which turns deal vouchers into attractive gift certificates, can help. The new startup was created by the London-based team behind the deal aggregation service Dealzinga.com, Alex Vander Hoeven, Bob Pluss and Chan Yin. During a 24-hour hackathon earlier this month, the group came up with the idea after having a discussion about whether or not daily deals were acceptable gifts. Says Vander Hoeven, “there are so many good deals out there that I’m sure people would love to give as gifts, but no one wants to get a standard voucher as a present.” Presentify.me aims to the solve the aesthetics problem by turning vouchers into pretty gift certificates. It currently works with vouchers from Groupon, Dealfind, Tippr or GiltCity, with more on the way. To use the site, you’re walked through a quick wizard where you input the pertinent info (the link to the deal, voucher number and your name) and choose a design. For now, there are only three holiday-themed designs to choose from, but Vander Hoeven says they’re preparing themes for other occasions, like birthdays, Valentine’s Day and Easter. Further down the road, user-generated designs will also be featured. It’s a simple idea and a handy tool…at least until the big guys figure out that this is the kind of thing they should be offering deal-buying customers themselves. Presentify.me has $400,000 in angel funding from Andrew Bachman, Tim Skyes, and Jamie and David Dingman. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Most of the communications apps that have gotten big on smartphones have been built by well-established companies that have existing user bases they can promote to, with Facebook, Twitter and Skype being the top examples. The other successes have most often had venture money to help them cover advertising costs. But a smaller startup has been climbing up the iTunes App Store and Android Market charges over the last few days. Called Voxer, it provides a walkie talkie push-to-talk voice service reminiscent of Nextel. Or, in modern parlance, it’s sort of like text messages but with voice instead of text. It’s basically a direct competitor to another startup, HeyTell, that we’ve covered, as well as TalkBox… and getting to be more of a competitor every day, judging by its recent trajectory. The app has gone from #40 to #6 within the past week in the social networking category of the United States App Store, following its rise earlier this year in random other countries like Brazil and Saudi Arabia. It’s now a trend among many Twitter users, too. (Yeah, the social networking category isn’t especially big once you get past the leading web services, but this much growth for this type of app is unusual.) To use Voxer, you simply download it from either store (iTunes here, Android here), create a new identity or log in with Facebook, sync it with your phone’s address book and/or Facebook, then start chatting with other individual friends, or groups that you join or create. The interface shows a text message style interface. You hold a talk button to record a quick message for the other party, although there’s also an option to listen live to an incoming message that a friend is recording. You can also send text messages within the flow of correspondence. We talked to Voxer’s vice president of growth, Gustaf Alstromer, for more details. He’s a veteran mobile entrepreneur, from his days growing up in Sweden to his past startup Heysan to his current job. Distribution, as he explains with an acute understanding, has always been the biggest problem. “It’s a really good time now versus any other time in history” to be building a mobile app, he says, because “distribution has been solved by the App Store and Android Market, and now it’s about the tactics you use within that.” Alstromer says the city of Cleveland started getting big first in the US, which has been followed by growth in a number of other cities around the country. While it’s not entirely clear what set the app off, the company has a variety of best practices going for tracking clickthroughs, conversions, and overall usage, using third parties like Mixpanel as well as its in-house systems. Services like this rely on network effects, and its launch on Android earlier this month could have played a big part — iPhone users are no longer stuck just using the app with other iPhone users. Alstromer says that its Android downloads have exploded (although he’s not providing any specific numbers), adding that total usage on Android could pass iPhone within the next few months. The phonebooks are far more essential than Facebook overall, although the latter is crucial for some demographics. The company also has an unusual backstory. It’s founded by veteran entrepreneur Tom Katis, a decorated soldier who previously cofounded a major security contractor, Triple Canopy (here’s a good New York Times profile on the company from 2005). The idea for Voxer originated during an ambush in Afghanistan, he tells me, when he was trying to coordinate reinforcements and the medical team in the middle of a firefight — he needed a way to talk to everyone all at once, and the government-issue walkie talkies weren’t doing the trick. I’ll have more on his story later. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInSaul Klein on Europe’s Billion-Dollar StartupsWhere will the next billion-dollar startups come from? The tech world and most VCs tend to be parochial, looking at Silicon Valley, maybe New York, and a few other hot markets like China and Brazil. But what about the Old Country? Yesterday, I was having coffee with Saul Klein, a partner at Index Ventures and co-founder of Seedcamp. He believes that in every major city across Europe, Russia, and Israel, there are “a legion of companies that are capable of achieving billion dollar valuations and in some cases are likely to be able to do close to a billion dollars in revenues over the next 3 to 5 years.” I asked him to name five while I pointed my iPhone video camera at him, and he was able to give me a much longer laundry list , which I’ve added below (along with some others he sent me afterwards). I’ve indicated which ones are Index investments and where each one was originally founded. Which of these will get into the billion-dollar club? (Note that some of these already are billion-dollar companies. You can click through to their Crunchbase profiles to learn more about each one). Skype (London, Index)Playfish (London, Index)Wonga (London)ASOS (London, Index)Mind Candy (London Index)Net-a-Porter (London, Index)Betfair (London, Index)Klarna (Stockholm)Spotify (Stockholm)Wix (Tel Aviv)Conduit (Tel Aviv)Fon (Madrid, Index)Privalia (Barcelona, Index)Criteo (Paris, Index)Vente-Privee (Paris)SoundCloud (Berlin, Index)LogMeIn (Budapest)AVG Technologies (Prague)Kaspersky Lab (Moscow)Ozon (Russia, Index)Yandex (Moscow)Mail.ru (Moscow) Latest headlines delivered to you daily The primary focus for app developers, aside from making kick ass apps, is finding truly effective ways to monetize those apps, whether it be through targeted, location-enabled ad solutions, in-game purchases, or incentivized downloads. As freemium models proliferate, this stuff becomes increasingly important. The other piece of the puzzle is helping app creators manage and understand their user base, because with a more granular picture of who is using the app, where they are, how they’re using the app, and so on, developers can design better user experiences, and in turn, open up new monetization opportunities. Appboy, a startup offering a free mobile software development toolkit (SDK) for developers, is trying to do just that. AppBoy, simply put, wants to enable app developers to expand, engage, and better understand their user base. And to help with that mission, the startup is today announcing that it has raised $1 million in seed funding. The investment was led by Blumberg Capital, with participation from Metamorphic Ventures, Accelerator Ventures, Bullpen Capital and T5 Capital. Up until recently, the AppBoy team consisted of founder and CEO Mark Ghermezian, but with this new round of funding in tow, the team has expanded to seven, including two new technical co-founders, Bill Magnuson and Jon Hyman, who joined AppBoy shortly after winning the top prize at the 2011 NYC Disrupt Hackathon for Gilt-ii, a browser bookmarklet that lets users create auctions around Gilt sales. With funding secured, the startup is now taking its solution into beta. Right now, it’s purely iOS, but Ghermezian said that Android integration is on its way. Of course, that’s all well and good, but how exactly is AppBoy looking to improve the discovery of apps, up intelligence on users, and encourage engagement? In practice, AppBoy is overlaid on developers’ apps so that they don’t have to leave their app to access its features. From there, the solution lets developers create profiles for their individual apps, cross-promote their apps, and update users through news and alerts, and enable game mechanics to enable status levels and badges that boost engagement and reward usage.  AppBoy then allows app users to create profiles themselves, along with the ability to get badges and checkin to the app, all of which developers can easily track from the app or from AppBoy’s developer dashboard. From there, developers can control news and recommended apps, and at some point in the near future, will be able to use the web-based backend to view analytics and communicate with their users, receiving feedback and more through CRM tools. For app discovery, there are plenty of ways for consumers to finds new apps, from Chomp to newcomers like Stamped, but most current solution focused on providing users with recommendations based on their download history. AppBoy is looking to provide developers with a solution that bases recommendations on actual usage — by making it easy for users to build rich profiles within apps. And AppBoy wants to partner with developers first, create a strong ecosystem among the app makers first, before targeting the end user and simply becoming another app search engine. The idea is to be able to segment users down to specific niches, to see that a 21-year-old male from Alberta is using the app and is spending 20 minutes a day on the app and has 5 badges. With AppBoy those badges become URLs and can then be tracked, so through a simple overlay and checkin system, the startup is trying to build a solution that makes tracking usage a breeze. If users are sharing apps over social networks, AppBoy has a unique URL for those shares, too, again aimed at making tracking easier. For readers looking to get early access to AppBoy to test it out and provide feedback, the startup is providing 50 free invites. To take advantage, simply head over to AppBoy’s homepage here and use “techcrunch” in the “invite code” box. Then chime in here and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Hello, what do we have here? A new facial recognition mobile app? Sure looks like it. The company is called Faced.me, and its upcoming app aims to recognize faces and then connect those faces to users’ social networking profiles, allowing you to friend and follow the people you see. The company emerged from November’s Startup Weekend in Brazil, but hasn’t yet launched publicly. The project reminds me a lot of Recognizr, the facial recognition mobile app from The Astonishing Tribe (TAT), created prior to TAT’s acquisition by RIM. Sadly, Recognizr remained a conceptual demo app only – it never arrived in any mobile app store. Hopefully Faced.me won’t meet the same fate. The app’s strategy and development team includes Alexandre Resende, Thalis Antunes, Fernando Pauer, Pedro Saad, and Marco Vanossi, who previously created ClickPic, a photo-sharing app that also uses image recognition. Thiago Teodoro, a manager in the Corporate Strategy division at HP, is also helping advise the startup. According to the company’s investor pitch, the Faced.me app uses proprietary technology to recognize a person’s face in less than 1 second by identifying different facial points. It then matches those faces to the social networking accounts for that user, allowing you to friend them on Facebook, follow them on Twitter or connect on LinkedIn. Patents on the tech have been filed both locally and internationally through the PCT. For now, the company can only identify the faces of other registered Faced.me users, who are required to provide a photo or video upon signup. But Vanossi says the technology itself is already scalable enough to crawl the photos tagged on Facebook, it just needs additional investment to afford doing so. The startup was chosen as the best by the Startup Weekend judges. However, the judges, who included Dave McClure of 500 Startups, Haroldo Korte of Atomico Ventures and other top Brazilian VC’s, gave Faced.me second place because it was clear the team had been working on the technology ahead of the weekend hackathon. Unfortunately for those of us who don’t mind a little creepiness, most companies involved in the facial recognition space limit the use of the tech to tagging photos, not recognizing strangers. Google is rumored to have its own facial recognition technology developed, for example, but has held off on launching due to the ever-problematic “creepy” factor. Whatever. Creepy can be cool, you know – just ask Facebook. In any event, the lack of other players in this space (TAT was scooped up by RIM, Polar Rose by Apple, PittPatt by Google) has left a great big hole startups can fill if they have the guts to cross the creepy line. Now, let’s just hope the darned thing from Faced.me actually works if and when it arrives. Below, a demo video of the app in action this past weekend: Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’ve heard the story before: The Internet forced many offline industries to adapt to new distribution media, find new business models amidst the rubble of old models, and accept the fact that people’s very behavior (and methods of consumption) were changing drastically. Do that or face the consequences. Some sadly thought it was just a fad. The Web has wreaked havoc on some of these industries more so than others, one of those notable victims being the publishing industry.  Over the last few years, publishing companies have been forced to accomodate eReaders, tablets, social media, and a bevy of new multimedia channels. Perhaps more than others, they’ve been slow to evolve and they’ve struggled, because, as they say, Rome wasn’t built in a day. (Even though it seems that apps can be.) Link.me, an Australian startup with headquarters in San Francisco, has been hard at work trying to find creative and cost-effective ways for publishers to retain their print businesses while incorporating the new digital technologies that many readers have come to expect. To do so, Link.me started with QR codes — those pervading black-and-white pixellated squares that have come to represent bar codes 2.0. Publishers have incorporated QR codes onto book jackets for several years now, but due to (their seemingly institutional) hesitation, they’ve been slow to integrate those codes into the actual text of their books, magazines, and so on. To better connect publishers with their audience (and give them a shot at acquiring new readers), Link.me has been forging partnerships with the top book publishers to launch trials, deals, promotions, and more through QR codes. The startup’s current client roster includes HarperCollins, Hachette Book Group, Penguin, Macmillan, McGraw-Hill and Random House.    In October, Link.me signed with its newest client, McGraw-Hill, and as an example of the kind of work they’re doing, one of the publishing company’s recent publications, “The Zappos Experience”, (written by Joseph Michelli) embedded QR codes in over 15 individual chapters. The goal was, of course, to bring The Zappos Experience “to life”, says Link.me Founder and CEO Antony McGregor Dey, and to allow readers to scan those codes with their smartphones to directly access multimedia content. For example, a scanned code might open a Facebook page devoted to Zappos’ philosophy on “Delivering Happiness” or open video clips that offer a glimpse inside the Zappos conference room, and so on. Basically, these QR codes allow publishers to begin offering in their books the same extra features that music labels have added to albums over the decades — or that the film industry adds to its DVDs. And with the growing rate of smartphone adoption and the ease of scanning, this kind of bonus content can stay digital and remain easy-to-use. Link.me uses its mobile tags (along with mobile content) to try to get readers to register directly with the brand. The publishers, then, can gain direct access to their readers and attempt to build and maintain relationships with those readers through interactive content. Link.me essentially wants to give publishers the ability to build out direct marketing databases, propelled by the data gained from readers signing up for various extras and deals through their QR codes.  As publishers aggregate data on customer interests, they can then target their marketing to readers based on their individual interests. And that’s how Link.me is making money; the startup charges publishers for access to their database, while usage remains free to readers. Through how-to videos on a kitchen appliance, for example, warranty registration, discounts towards future purchases, interviews with an author, free music tracks, Link.me wants to take any special content that a brand may have to offer and turn that into interactive content embedded into the product. McGregor Dey says that he sees Link.me’s service becoming a replacement for the old cardboard warranty registration cards you used get, but updated for the digital age, coupled with the goal of building direct marketing channels and retaining customers.  And it’s not only QR codes, Link.me also offers these extra features by way of SMS and email. Through these tools, the startup has been building some good traction for their publishing clients. McGregor Dey said that response rates among readers have been as high as 20 percent of total books sales. In other words, if a book sells 300,000 copies, 60,000 of those readers are scanning QR codes or clicking through SMS.  McGregor Dey said that even their lowest campaigns (in terms of response rate) have been above 4 percent. Compared to other comparable marketing channels, like banner ads, which can average 0.2 percent click through rates and Facebook links which are even lower, Link.me’s solution can have real value. Link.me, in several incarnations, has been around since 2008 (it was previously known as QMCodes) and has been operating in private beta for most of that time. Since its inception, the startup mostly focused on publishers, and that’s where most of its current marketing efforts are today — as that’s where it’s found market penetration. But the Link.me CEO said that he sees opportunities for Link.me’s model beyond publishing, especially in retail, whether it be for fashion, sporting goods, or kitchen appliances.  McGregor Dey said that he and his team have made the Link.me platform adaptable, so that as adoption of NFC and image recognition become mainstream, they will be integrated as well. Link.me was initially angel funded by Andrew Barlow, the co-founder of online analytics company Hitwise and has also received some investment from the Australian government. The company is currently raising its series A. For more on Link.me, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You don’t need to work on Wall Street to have seen this one coming: Today, for the first time since its NASDAQ debut on November 4th, Groupon has fallen below its IPO price, which initially placed the company’s stock at $20 per share. The company’s stock opened (at first trade) at $28 per share, with a market cap of $17.8 billion. It’s currently hovering at about $17.30 per share, down nearly 14 percent on the day. The daily deal behemoth’s stock has been on a three-day slide, and this marks the third day in a row of double digit declines. This came after the stock hit its all-time (really, all-month since IPO) high on Friday at $26.19 per share.  Welcome to the public markets, Groupon. Some might say that, although Groupon was up 31 percent before this week, raised $700 million selling 35 million shares at $20 each before going public on November 4th — mind you, the biggest IPO since Google in 2004 — the decline was inevitable. That there’s no way that the company’s current performance (and short-term prospects) work out to a $15 billion+ market cap and sky-high valuation. (You can read our assessment of Groupon’s value in contrast with soon-to-IPO Zynga here.) But it also seems that the recent decline of Groupon’s stock is a result of just how many shares it sold at IPO. Groupon sold about 5.5 percent of its stock on November 4th (of its 637.3 million shares outstanding), meaning that a relatively small amount of stock was available to short sellers. As Crain’s points out, the premium to borrow shares (in advance of shorting) dropped from 90 percent to 30 percent early this week. And it looks like the short-sellers are moving fast and furiously. The next few months will no doubt be marked by a series of ups and downs, and it will be fascinating to see where Groupon’s stock bottoms out. I have no dog in the fight and, frankly, am optimistic about the company’s long-term prospects and want to see them be successful, but I think they have a long way to fall yet. More to come. Follow GRPN’s movements here.  Excerpt image from Marietta Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yesterday morning, we reported that Microsoft had acquired Israeli video startup, VideoSurf, for approximately $70 million. The deal indeed has been greenlighted, as Microsoft confirmed in its blog post yesterday. However, at the time, the price of the acquisition was unclear; several sources (who wished to remain anonymous) pegged the number at $70 million. But, today we’ve heard from a solid source that the actual price of the acquisition was actually just under $100 million — in cash.  Sure, it’s not quite the $8.5 billion Microsoft paid for popular voice and video-over-IP service, Skype, but for a relatively young startup, this is a big win. As to its backstory, VideoSurf was founded by four Israeli entrepreneurs, Eitan Sharon, Lior Delgo, Shai Deljo, and Achi Brandt in 2006, and the San Mateo-based startup has since raised $28 million from a bunch of notable investors, which include Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg and her husband, SurveyMonkey CEO David Goldberg, along with Al Gore and Current Media CEO Joel Hyatt (as well as a few others, like Pitango VC and Verizon Ventures.) Why did Microsoft make this acquisition? Well, just as Microsoft plans to integrate Skype into Xbox Live and VideoKinect for Xbox Live to allow gamers to Skype from their consoles, the tech giant plans to add VideoSurf’s technology into the Xbox 360 ecosystem (specifically Xbox Live) as well. Microsoft will be rolling out voice search over the holiday season and is currently in the process of integrating content from video and cable providers (like Verizon, Comcast, HBO and Epix, for example) into Xbox Live. Microsoft is also adding a search layer over the platform to let users search for content from apps and beyond, so that one searching for Lord Of The Rings might get results from Netflix, or Comcast’s library, or apps from its Zune Marketplace. Because VideoSurf’s platform is all about video discovery and allowing users to quickly find video content from a wide range of websites (like Hulu, Dailymotion, Metacafe, etc.), this will amp up Xbox Live’s search criteria, which, at this point, just relies on metadata offered up by the content provider.  Not only that, but VideoSurf also implements some cool audio recognition technology along with facial recognition functionality that allows the startup to pull from specific frames within videos, which, when combined, the company (and Microsoft clearly agrees) can provide better search results (and relevancy) coupled with an enhanced user experience.  This is also a smart move play by Microsoft when looking at its future ambitions for both Xbox Live and search on the whole. As Xbox Live adds content from other independent video providers, VideoSurf’s multifaceted search technology can provide a much-improved means of parsing video content from these indie providers that typically don’t have the same amount of data tied to their videos as the larger, premium content providers. If and when Microsoft adds YouTube to Xbox Live, they will need an enhanced search mechanism to serve refined results from the some-billion-odd videos YouTube counts in its bullpen.  Microsoft could also leverage VideoSurf technology for Bing’s video search, making search a less-painful experience across its devices. Considering the startup’s technology will allow Kinect users to search and discover content across multiple entertainment providers within Xbox Live and use Kinect’s voice search powered by Bing, you can see the sizable value proposition inherent in this acquisition. This could allow Microsoft, via Kinect’s unique interface, to offer rich web-based search through TV — potentially leaping over Google based on its current efforts to do the same with Google TV. It will be interesting to see how the Xbox ecosystem improves with Skype and VideoSurf integration, but the future is definitely looking somewhat bright — something that’s not always said in when referring to the tech old timer.  For more, check out Microsoft’s press release here, and VideoSurf at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily VoteIt, a New Orleans-based startup focused on helping groups make decisions with realtime voting tools, announced today that it has raised $800,000 in seed funding from a group of local angels. And, in an example that should prove intriguing to those entrepreneurs looking to make Louisiana home base, VoteIt told us today that it is one of the many startups taking advantage of the state’s tax credit programs aimed at encouraging early-stage businesses (and their investors) to set up shop in Louisiana.  For example, there’s the Angel Investor tax credit, which provides state income or franchise tax credits of up to 35 percent for entrepreneurial businesses; as well as the Digital Media tax credit, which offers a tax credit of 25 percent on production expenditures for digital interactive productions in the state and 35 percent tax credit for payroll expenditures for Louisiana residents. Pretty cool. We also recently wrote about Federated Sample, another NOLA-based startup that has just raised money from the local venture capital community.  Both of these companies are focused on making it easy for businesses to better test the pulse of their customers and larger populations in realtime. While Federated Sample brings efficiency to online sampling, VoteIt wants to help make group decision-making more efficient (and easier), enabling businesses to move past those collective moments of indecision, to action, by way of what the startup is calling a “realtime consensus generator”. What does that mean? Well, for starters VoteIt is in private beta and isn’t planning on launching until early 2012, so the company itself is still in process of collecting feedback — and iterating. But, fundamentally, says VoteIt CEO Taylor Beery, collaborative decision making has struggled to scale, as group decision making has been represented online with the standard checkbox, snapshot opinion gathering, and convoluted comment threads. As a result, businesses have turned to email and email workflow tools to make group decisions, which is generally non-scalable, impersonal, and again provides little clarity. Other solutions, the CEO said, have steered towards simplicity, sacrificing collaborating for scale based on the fear of overloading the user. To address this, VoteIt wants to take the collaborative potential of a three-person group and give it scale, providing the ability to make decisions and receive feedback from the group in realtime — from any device. While VoteIt is still holding back a bit on its features, Beery said that they’re going after a dynamic realtime engagement by creating a voting process that mimics a live, real world vote, allowing for debate, presentation of evidence, and consensus building. This will be implemented through a simple user interface that is cross-platform and device agnostic and also allows users to take comments out of the comment stream to organize and categorize them inline, he says.  VoteIt wants to create a reward system as well and transparency so that polling is done in an organized, accountable way.  As to use case, Beery sees the inefficiencies in both the patient-healthcare provider relationship as well as intercommunication between providers as prime targets for disruption by VoteIt’s system. Doctors continue to use chat rooms to consult groups of other physicians in different locations on group decisions, as well as email, which slows down the collaboration process. Using the VoteIt system, he says, doctors would be able to access a clear consult from the Web or their mobile devices based on collaborative debate and presentation of evidence — medical records, videos, and so on. (See what Avado is doing for the physician-patient relationship as well, the Salesforce for personal health records startup is attacking a similar pain point.) Governance, too, whether it be non-profits or community groups, are largely dependent on large in-person meetings or reply-all email chains to make decisions and pass (oftentimes) simple resolutions. VoteIt wants to provide these kinds of users with a simple, scalable collaboration platform to build consensus and make decision making more efficient. Allowing the entire process of creating a vote, voting, and viewing results to take place on the group’s website or mobile devices lets users easily keep up with a group’s progress from any location. It will be interesting to see how this is implemented, whether it’s through a white-label, customized solution for individual businesses, or a one-size-fits-all dashboard and hosted platform, accompanied by widgets and so forth.  VoteIt is certainly tackling a big problem, but it remains to be seen whether real collaboration between large entities can happen in a web-based platform, especially one that starts with online voting. Real debate, back-and-forths, etc., can be tough to streamline and present in digital solutions. There are lots of platforms and solutions trying to make CRM and feedback workflows more manageable and easier to deal with for SMBs. I think VoteIt is onto something here, but the proof is in the pudding, as they say. Stay tuned for more.  Either way, again, it’s nice to see the New Orleans tech community tackling big problems, as well as the state of Louisiana creating tax incentives and making other institutional changes to encourage innovation and bring startups into its borders.  And on that note, we’ve also come across an interesting new initiative called NOLABound, which is attempting to promote progress in New Orleans (within digital media, biosciences, sustainable industries, and arts-based businesses) by inviting 25 professionals — chosen through a competitive application process — to the city. The program will give the chosen applicants complete access to businesses, influencers, and other professionals in exchange for tweeting their thoughts about the city and its business ecosystem. The idea is to build momentum within these industries in New Orleans as well as broadcast to the rest of the country what’s going on within the city — and use the impressions of the 25 applicants as a way to see what other professionals and experts think. A unique form of scaled, crowdsourced feedback in and of itself.  For more on NOLABound, check out the program here, and for more on the early progress of VoteIt, go here. Video below. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Zinio, which bills itself as the world’s largest digital newsstand and bookstore, has raised $20 million in new funding according to an SEC filing. Zinio provides global access to thousands of magazine titles from most major publishers in a variety of languages. The company’s website allows publications to be read online or offline on desktop computers (Windows, Mac OS X and Linux) and mobile devices such as the iPad, iPhone, iPod Touch, WebOS and Android handsets (they just launched their Kindle Fire offering). Originally founded in 2000, Zinio is owned by billionaire entrepreneur David H. Gilmour, with managing director Doug Carlson (who is solely listed on the regulatory filing documents) and Zinio founder and CEO Richard Maggiotto running the business. The company also recently appointed Virendra Vase, a former Jigsaw (now a Salesforce company) executive, as its new COO. Zinio is headquartered in San Francisco with offices in NYC, London, Paris, Barcelona and Taipei. Last we heard Zinio raised funding was way back in 2005, when the company completed a $7 million growth financing round led by North Bridge Ventures and Commonwealth Capital, partly to finance an acquisition. It’s unclear if they or which new investors participated in the recent $20 million funding round, but we’ve contacted the company for more information and will update when we hear back.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily American pop band We The Kings, or rather their record label S-Curve, have teamed up with Israeli startup Interlude (earlier coverage) to produce a fancy interactive video that blends familiar gameplay with video sequences and god-awful music (sorry, We The Kings aficionados). The “Say You Like Me” video was released yesterday on Vevo, and you should really check it out. Not that it’s the first music video that uses Interlude’s technology platform to boost fan engagement: see Jason Kincaid’s story on Andy Grammer’s interactive music clip from last year. In this video, you can ‘control’ the band members as they set out on a quest to save a girl after she gets kidnapped by a cartoonized version of her boyfriend (or something).  You can pick any member of the band and play some basic games during the video without the music interrupting for a second, although the song will end as soon as your character gets wiped out, which actually resulted in me wanting to get killed as quickly as possible (sorry, We The Kings aficionados). It’s inexplicably captivating, and a nice change to all those boring, linear music videos. The best part of the video is you can turn off the sound (sorry, We The Kings aficionados). And here’s the obligatory ‘behind the scenes’ video: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some people love Klout, while others are in doubt. But, the fact of the matter is that, in the end, all this talking about Klout is … good for Klout. Apparently, in 100 million ways. At the very least, when it comes to social media influence and reputation, Klout is hard to ignore. Even if, like Alexia, one believes that no one really gives a damn about your Klout score. Well, thanks to Josh Constine’s legwork and research, we bring you another solution. Enter the snark-ily named Flout.me, founded by Pat Nakajima and Anoop Ranganath. In the duo’s own words: “Sites like Klout try to tell you how important you are. That’s ridiculous! Only you know how important you are. Flout lets you flaunt it to the world.”  Yes. If you find yourself less than desperate to share just how influential you are on social networks and you’re sick of all the social media grandstanding that’s become a byproduct of Web 2.0, look no further. Flout.me allows you to give yourself your true score, whether that’s 9000+, 6, or -31. Right now I, personally, am feeling about -34. But tomorrow’s a new day.  As Josh said (and I find myself in agreement), Klout is currently working in overdrive to become the method by which we measure influence on the Web. Some might say that we don’t really need a decimal-style ranking system to intuit influence. Robert Scoble really just needs Google+, for example. Of course, one day in the future, Klout may just become that thoroughly useful tool with accurate and deep diagnostics, but until then, Flout.me may just provide that viable alternative we’ve been waiting for. In the meantime, I’m going to get busy designing a way to convert Klout scores into virtual currency so that we can trade those scores on an open, free Klout market. (In an update, it looks like a startup named Wahooly is taking a touch of my advice, with a focus on startups. Check it out. Kinda cool.) But, for now, go ahead. Set your social influence score with Flout.me and flaunt it. Because, after all, rules are made to be flouted. For more on Klout-related news, here’s Josh’s story on Vitrue’s Klout integration and Sarah’s post on how Google+ may just be improving the Klout-osphere. Wow, My Flout amplification score is -31 on @floutdotme! Get yours at http://t.co/x5oH6q3B http://t.co/ZZbLJVLh Help me America:) — Jure KLEPIC (@jkcallas) November 23, 2011  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Following my post last night about our effort to use CrunchBase in more ways on TechCrunch, some readers have shared how they’re already using it. One was Dirk Neumann from “social supercomputer” startup Opani, which provides tools to help people more easily analyze large data sets. He’s used CrunchBase data to try to come up with a formula for pricing talent in startup acquisitions. His analysis, below, is in response to a recent panel at law firm Orrick, where a number of acquisition heads at major tech companies had noted that there was “no general formula” for doing so. He identified 71 early-stage acquisitions and 84 late-stage acquisitions in CrunchBase, then further defined the early stage group as startups purchased for below $66 million, with fewer than 50 employees, and investments of less than $5 million. Later-stage companies were defined as having acquisition prices above $66 million and between 50 and 500 employees. The findings are a bit rough, but here they are:  An early-stage startup costs $8.5 million plus $0.5 million per employee. But, you can see that the graph above shows all sorts of outliers, like Grand Central’s giant deal, that confuse the picture. The variation isn’t too surprising when you consider that many early-stage acquisitions are done based on the acquirer having very high hopes for the team and the product being bought.  He also found that the average late-stage startup costs $135 million plus $0.5 million per employee. The graph is far more normal looking. And the big payout beyond employees makes sense when you consider the additional capital and product value that the acquirer believes they’re getting. Do you have more CrunchBase analysis to share? Let me know: eldon (at) techrunch (dot) com. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online pinboard Pinterest is the new hotness.  VCs are piling in because it is growing like crazy.  How crazy?  According to comScore, Pinterest generated 421 million pageviews in the U.S. in October, up 2,000 percent since June when it was at an estimated 20 million. Pinterest, which is still in an invite-only beta, has already surpassed the U.S. pageviews of much more established sites such as Etsy (which grew a healthy 47 percent since June to 348 million pageviews in October).   I am comparing Pinterest to Etsy because, while one is an ecommerce marketplace and the other is more of a crowdsourced catalog, they both seem to appeal to the same types of people—mostly women interested in design, fashion, and quality products that are not mainstream. Also, from what I can tell anecdotally, Etsy items are very popular on Pinterest. All of those pageviews are coming from a relatively small number of users.  In October, Pinterest had an estimated 3.3 million unique visitors in the U.S., up more than fourfold since June when it was at 608,000.  On average, each person on Pinterest generates 128 pageviews a month (a number which will no doubt come down).  It doesn’t yet have many users, but they are addicted to the service, which encourages you to “repin” other people’s image-heavy Web clippings (which is like reblogging on Tumblr and similarly generates a ton of internal pageviews as people jump from pinned image to pinned image). Since so much of what people organize and pin on Pinterest are products, the site is essentially collecting a lot of commercial intent and is in a position to know what types of products to recommend users or what types of ads/deals to show them in the future. But people don’t search on Pinterest.  It is a place to discover new products.  My wife is one of those addicts. She is on Pinterest every day, which tells me something. The early adopters are not your typical tech-obsessed early adopters. Investors see the same trends, which is why they think Pinterest is only at the early stages of its growth.  Update: These numbers are just estimates from comScore,and as such are not perfect.  But at least they are apples-to-apples. Etsy says its internal metrics show 1.2 billion pageviews in October. Pinterest does not disclose its internal numbers.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily We crave inspiration. When energy is low or there’s a pause in our day, we turn to Facebook, Twitter, or Instagram. But there, stimulation is drowned in exhausting, endless streams of content. DailyModi is a brand new free iPhone app committed to structuring inspiration into bursts of discovery. With addictive finger swipes, you rate your way through 3 daily slideshows of paintings, shoes, typography, and more. Compare preferences with friends, and buy or learn about what you like. Leave feeling satisfied, and return tomorrow for more. DailyModi’s co-creator Gregor Hochmuth believes “It’s about creating a daily ritual. You know there’s content waiting for you. And it’s very quick and simple, you can play in two minutes.” Hochmuth explained that sites like Pinterest and FFFOUND are beautiful and different each time you visit, but there’s no prescriptive way to use them. By giving DailyModi more direction — there’s just 3 sets of 20 images to rate each day — the app pairs inspiration discovery with a sense of accomplishment when you complete the available sets. Modi, Inc  was founded after Hochmuth, a product manager on Chrome, and the eponymous Shaun Modi, an interaction designer who created the G+ circle editor, both left Google. They first released PlayModi last month, a website that lets you create your own image or text sets, and browse those of others. AirBnB now uses a PlayModi Facebook Page app to let fans rate its top 40 destinations with their arrow keys. However, Hochmuth says “People really like the swipe gesture for rating things” and with the backend in place set out to built their mobile app. With DailyModi, you login through Facebook so it knows your gender and can tailor the fashion sets accordingly. You’re then shown the day’s 3 sets. They’re like slideshows, but you have to swipe up to like or down to dislike in order to proceed. When you complete a set you can share it as well as see the percentage, count, and Facebook friends who liked each image. If enabled, Push notifications improve retention by informing users when new sets have been added. You can then click through to buy the fashion products on sites like Zappos, learn about art and culture images through Pinterest, or just save any of the images to your photo library. This last feature makes DailyModi a killer way to find cool phone wallpapers, especially since all your liked images are collected in a shoebox on the app’s home screen. There’s still some rough edges. Set results take a few seconds to load, and there’s currently no way to share individual images, but these seem easily remedied. Its biggest challenge will be getting users actually make it a ritual, because since it lacks direct communication channels there’s less urgency to open it than a social network. In addition to monetizing through affiliate fees on products bought through the app, Modi has had a lot of interest from brands. They want to use it as a distribution and feedback channel for product promotion and market research. They could pay to offer a branded set, and then use the like and dislike data collected to refine their marketing or design strategies. I can foresee brands being eager to create sets and replace their slideshows with Modi embeds that can collect this valuable data. DailyModi is a breath of fresh air in so many ways. The finite set size keep you from feeling overwhelmed, and the daily turnover prevents guilt. There’s no overt prompts to share or produce content, so there’s no shame in spectating. What’s most innovative is that with DailyModi, inspiration isn’t a side effect of content consumption, it’s the explicit purpose.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’ve changed something on your website, and everyone hates it. At least, that’s how it seems. Once you’ve grown past, say… 10 users, change will almost always be resisted. You get used to it. More often than not, unsolicited user feedback isn’t super helpful (if only because it usually boils down to “You suck! Screw your new logo! I’m removing you from my RSS reader!”). Sometimes, though, the userbase really does know what it wants — but even then, it can be hard for them to express it properly. That’s where Wishbox comes in. By combining on-the-fly screenshots with an in-browser annotations tool, Wishbox allows even your most technically inept users to send visual feedback straight to your inbox. Wishbox places a small pop-out “Send Feedback” tab in a pre-determined place near the edge of the screen. When clicked, Wishbox snaps a screenshot of your current browser window, throws it into an embedded annotations tool, and lets users get their mark on before shippin’ things your way. You can see a demo here. The tool is a bit slow to load (I’ll forgive them; they did just roll out of a rather small Beta), but it’s all pretty buttery once it’s up and running. Wishbox is free at first (it looks like they plan to charge after a monthly cap of 100 feedback submissions, but pricing details aren’t immediately available. We’ve reached out for clarification. Update: It’s based on Jotform, so the pricing scheme is the same), and installation is a matter of punching in your e-mail and plugging a Javascript blurp into your page. As an example, see a mid-action screenshot of my feedback creation session for Wishbox’s website below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Love it or hate it, but Klout is one of the key players in today’s influence/reputation market. Even if the whole concept of ranking people based on popularity feels a little icky to you (I feel you), the startup has the potential to form the basis of something bigger, something less spammy, and something less easily gamed by “social media marketers.” Or so we hope. In the meantime, for those of you who care about this sort of thing: hooray, your score just went up today thanks to Google+! Although people have been able to add Google+ to their Klout profiles since September, the company announced today that Google+ is now directly impacting Klout scores. The service has begun measuring the influence for users who have already connected their Google+ accounts to Klout and, of those, 62% are considered “active” users of the social network. For these active users, their Klout scores should have increased based on the popularity of their public Google+ posts. Those who have added Google+ but are not active on the network will not see a drop, however. In other words, there’s no penalty for not using Google+, which seems fair, given that the network’s true influence and importance is still debatable.  After calculating the score changes, the median score change for active G+ connected users is 0.4742 and the mean score change is 2.1577. Klout notes that some people who really embraced Google+ as a platform saw their score jump up as much as 40+ points. Users who are active on all three top social networks (Google+, Twitter and Facebook combined) will likely see smaller score increases as opposed to those who are only active on two of the three (i.e., Facebook and G+ or Twitter and G+). But for the most part, active Google+ users, who tend to have scores ranging from 30 to 60, will see a score increase of 2.177 today. Latest headlines delivered to you daily New startup accelerator Advise.me, home to the global startup initiative which encourages entrepreneurs from around the world to apply for seed funding, is today announcing new partnerships with LinkedIn, GoSquared and SnapEngage. All three companies will provide direct support and/or free subscriptions to their services to the program’s participants. In addition, the team at Advise.me has grown again, and now includes folks from Spotify, Evernote, GetSatisfaction, MTV and more. With the new LinkedIn partnership, the business social networking service will provide direct support to any Advise.me companies building on top of LinkedIn’s APIs. It will also allow the startups to post up to three jobs on the site for free when it comes time to recruit talent. Meanwhile, real-time analytics company GoSquared will offer businesses 12 months of its Pro subscription service for free while live chat support company SnapEngage will offer 24 months of their premium offering (its Business subscription service). The Advise.me team also has new members as of today, including: The incubator’s team already included dozens of startup founders, engineers and execs from Google, Amazon, Apple, Facebook, Zynga, Microsoft, Twitter, EA, Rackspace and more. In addition to helping other startups get off the ground, some Advise.me team members are using the incubator’s resources themselves to launch their own startup: Chirpr, a social networking app still in stealth mode. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last May at TechCrunch Disrupt NYC, Gauri Manglik and her two cofounders launched SpotOn, a mobile recommendation app for bars and restaurants based on where your friends have checked in on Foursquare. The people who ended up using the app used it more as a social network than as a recommendation tool.  So Manglik and her team took what they learned and built an entirely new product called Fondu, which they are launching today as an iPhone app. “We are building a social network for writing bite-sized reviews,” says Manglik. It is a Foursquare for foodies. You can search for places nearby or pull up a list of your recent Foursquare check-ins, and review each place with a short comment and give it a one-to-four petal rating with a swipe of your thumb.  The app gives you a feed to follow your friends’ ratings and mini-reviews, or you can see what is popular on a map near you. Fondu is designed to be an antidote to Yelp. “You write your review on Yelp and it goes to a community directory,” notes Manglik. “There are so many people you don’t care about on the service.”  With Fondu, you see only reviews from your friends and popular reviews which have been given “cheers” by the community.   The company raised a $575,000 seed round led by ENIAC Ventures.  The NYU Innovation Fund, Harbor Road Ventures, Blazer Ventures, Lawrence Lenihan, and Zach Aarons also participated in the round.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over 10 million people have created artful iPhonography with Instagram, but they’ve never seen their masterpieces any bigger than a Postagram postcard. But now, thanks to a peculiar synergy between the mediums and a secret algorithm, CanvasPop has found a way to blow up Instagrams and print them as beautiful canvas paintings. See, Instagram’s filters reduce graininess and so does the texture of canvas. This means that even at 20″ by 20″, almost 10x their size on the iPhone, $60 CanvasPop prints look wall-worthy. CanvasPop is an expert at image upsizing, having been spun out of DNA 11 which printed blowups of DNA strands. CanvasPop launched 2 years ago to help emancipate low-resolution photos from mobile devices and social network. It accepts even the tiniest, noisiest images including old Facebook photos and those taken with the iPhone 3G. These are run through its algorithm that smooths pixelated edges, and the canvas they’re printed on further obscures any imperfections. Co-founder Adrian Salamunovic tells me CanvasPop saw Postagram and Prinstagram developing an Instagram ecosystem, and thought it could contribute something unique. Since those companies don’t have its technology and they print on paper, they’re restricted to producing stickers, small photo books, and posters tiled with little images. Built on the Instagram API, users can visit the CanvasPop website and authenticate with their Instagram account. They then choose their images, select print sizes ($30 for 12″ by 12″ or $60 for 20″ by 20′), and soon their prints are delivered to their door. The print CanvasPop sent me looked sharp from any farther than a few inches away. My only complaint was that it was packaged so securely to prevent damage in transit that it took me a few minutes to pull it free. Instagram has unlocked a generation of artists, helping people discover and capture the subtle beauty of the world around them. It seems tragic that once posted, Instagrams disappear down our social media streams and are rarely appreciated again. CanvasPop gives these works of art enduring life, and lets us express ourselves offline as vividly as we can on. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Socialize, makers of a “Social SDK” for mobile developers, is today launching version 1.0 of its “Social Action Bar.” This action bar is an easy-to-install mobile toolbar of sorts, which allows an app’s users to view the popularity of the app’s content, “like” and comment on items, and share content via SMS, email, Facebook or Twitter. In addition to the Social Action Bar SDK v. 1.0, the company is also offering an API for HTML5 developers with similar functionality. Socialize grew out of the app-making service AppMakr, which had previously built apps for brands like Disney, The Washington Post, Newsweek and Politico. In 2010, the company raised $1 million from Lotus founder Mitch Kapor, Bill Lee, Rich Chen, Charles River Ventures, and others. Shortly after, the company rebranded as “Socialize,” with the intent to provide mobile app developers with a customizable software development kit (SDK) that lets them quickly add social features to their apps. Says CEO Daniel R. Odio, the SDK can be installed in 5 minutes or less. The Socialize open source SDK, which launched earlier this summer, allows for the above-mentioned social activity (likes, comments, and shares), plus an “activity pane” allowing users to see what others have liked, commented on and shared, too. The idea is to add a social layer to all apps, allowing an app’s users to socialize with each other as well as with the brand itself.  AppMakr is currently serving as the testing grounds for the Socialize beta, and the growth there has been massive. The beta channel is up 1 million end users from 30 days ago, with 3,768,381 users now testing the service. Meanwhile, the externally-implemented SDK is smaller, but also doing well, with 95,743 end users, up grom 45,000 just 30 days ago. Now the Socialize Action Bar SDK has reached version 1.0, which means it’s stable and ready for more broader testing. Developers interested in making their apps social can grab the new SDK from Socialize’s website here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in January, Yuri Milner and SV Angel partnered to offer every startup that was part of Y Combinator’s winter batch (some 40 startups) $150K each in convertible debt. In September, national startup accelerator, TechStars, followed suit, upping its investment in each startup to $100K in convertible notes.  Providence, Rhode Island may not be the first city that pops into your head when you think of burgeoning startup ecosystems, but it looks like the city and one of its prominent young incubators is looking to change that. This week, Betaspring, the Providence-headquartered startup accelerator, announced that all startups that complete its 12-week accelerator program will be automatically eligible for a $50K equity investment from Rhode Island’s capital city. Of course, there is a small catch. For startups to be eligible, they must complete Betaspring’s Spring (or Summer) Programs, and they must agree to locate their companies in Providence for at least a year. Though this seems a small price to pay to begin putting the city on the map as a technology incubator and for grabbing $50K in convertible notes. Plus, in contrast to Y Combinator and TechStars, which fund companies upon entry into their programs, Betaspring will be seeding its startups with investment once the program is completed. Not a bad graduation present. Betaspring, which is itself a charter member of the TechStars network, provides mentorship, seed funding, office space, and exposure to a startup community of focused entrepreneurs. The accelerator focuses on startups in the web/mobile, physical technology, and gaming arenas. As to the background of this investment: The City of Providence is partnering not only with Betaspring but with other local angel and venture investors as well, including Slater Technology Fund and Cherrystone Angel Group to found the so-called Innovation Investment Program (IIP), which will be managed by the city and funded under the US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). The fund will use these federal dollars to provide startups with capital to get them off the ground and begin spurring innovation, growth, and job creation in Providence. The Betaspring team said that this new equity investment program is “the first of its kind for Providence and was championed by Providence Mayor Angel Taveras”. Together, the parties are working to support early stage ventures in Providence, which we love to see.   Betaspring has also extended its application deadline to midnight on Tuesday, November 22. And for all companies reading this who want a shot at application, you will have the opportunity to apply to Betaspring’s program through midnight on Wednesday, November 23rd — just be sure to reference this post using “TechCrunch” in your application. Applications can be found and submitted here. The spring session kicks-off on February 6th in Providence. For more, check out Betaspring’s blog post here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve all built up a ton of connections through networks like Facebook and Twitter. Now there’s a way to greedily exchange that social capital for real-world dollars. Shopcade is a new affiliate ecommerce platform where users create a personal store and feature products from a catalog of 40 million item. They can then blast store links to their social networks and earn affiliate kick-backs when their products sell. When used for good, Shopcade helps people structure the shopping recommendations they give friends to aid product discovery, and give to charity. But when used for evil, Shopcade incentivizes social network users to spam their friends. Facebook has been trying to keep social spammers out. It banned Ad.ly, which connected brands wishing to advertise with celebrities willing to post ads to their fans as status updates. This is because social spam pollutes the user experience at Facebook’s expense. Most people know and loathes someone who uses the news feed to market their small business or promotes events, but most people don’t have anything shill. Paid tweeting services let users earn money for publishing ads, but require tens of thousands of followers to be lucrative. Shopcade has the potential to give everyone an incentive to spam. Maybe it will help cash-strapped teens avoid crappy summer jobs. But more likely it will degrade the social network experience if it gets popular. The way the model works is Shopcade aggregates all the affiliate product feeds it can. Users create and customize a personal store and feature products they’d recommend — i.e. that they think their friends will want to buy. When someone buys a product, Shopcade gets an affiliate fee, but then rewards both the store owner and the purchaser by adding a small cash reward to their accounts. Users can cash out through PayPal or by donating their reward to charity. In addition to keeping a portion of the affiliate fees, Shopcade will monetize by selling custom themes and virtual goods that users can display on their stores. The redeeming property of Shopcade is the product recommendation feed on its home page. When shoppers visit, they’re shown what products their friends are adding to their stores or buying, as well as products based on their own activity and Facebook Likes. These could become a good way to discover relevant products if enough friends are on-board. From a business standpoint, Shopcade has potential. The 20-person London team was founded by Nathalie Gaveau, who started PriceMinister.com, a French ecommerce site which sold to Rakuten, the French eBay. It also includes an ex-PayPal employee that spearheaded that company’s global expansion.  Investors include Ian Livingstone, founder of Eidos Games, and Lord John Birt, Director-General of the BBC. Unfortunately, from a social good perspective, Shopcade may lower the barrier to affiliate marketing and assist the greedy to exploit the news feed and Twitter stream for low-effort financial gain.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInA First Step Towards <EM>Minority Report</EM> Ads From Inwindow Outdoor (Demo)You know that scene in Minority Report where Tom Cruise is walking through a mall and all the digital signs are talking to him and showing him highly targeted ads? Yeah, well, we are not there yet. But we are moving that direction. A New York City company called Inwindow Outdoor is testing several prototype digital “Experience Stations” in malls and hotel lobbies like the one I demo in the video above. They combine several interactive technologies—including motion capture, large touch screens, and NFC readers—to create immersive experiences in physical locations.   The unit I got a chance to play with above was loaded with a few typical apps designed to showcase its capabilities.  These apps included everything from an interactive ad with a photobooth feature to a way to watch movie trailers and buy tickets with an NFC-enabled phone or unlock local deals from stores at that specific mall.  The prototypes were built in partnership with Intel. As with any digital platform, the experience is only as good as the developers make each app.  The challenge in a physical setting is to make it so engaging that people actually will want to stop what they are doing or delay their journey to play with these things.  My sense is that traditional ads won’t work so well unless these are positioned at the point of sale for a specific product and they operate as information kiosks. But for general brand messaging, making the apps more game-like with rewards provided by advertisers is the way to go. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMountz on Creating a Company CultureHaving successfully created and launched a business where robots dart through distribution centers securing e-commerce products for delivery, Kiva Systems founder, Mick Mountz reflects on growing his company to 250 employees in just under a decade – and the company culture that organically formed alongside it. Mountz tells Founder Stories host Chris Dixon that Kiva Systems didn’t define its culture until “about five years” into operations. “We took this kind of latent approach, which is go fast, have fun, build, be competitive, be successful, and then people would come in and say jeez you got a great culture here and we said oh, that is interesting, what is it?” Mountz relied on his own employees to help answer the question, which leadership folded into its DNA. When asked in the below video what advice he has for founders, Mountz says “solve a big problem and take a big swing.” Adding, “when I told the early VC’s that I wanted to build hundreds of mobile robots, you’d get a lot of funny looks and I was told no at least 100 times and you just have to persist.” Check out each video for additional insights, along with episodes I and II of this interview. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring leaders of Reddit, Tumblr, Kickstarter and Dropbox are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mint competitor HelloWallet is launching on the iPhone today, with an application that provides at-a-glance spending guidance, budget details and your available cash balance. As a company, HelloWallet aims to differentiate itself from Mint by functioning as a full-service financial advisor, in addition to being a personal finance tracking application. On mobile, this aspect to its service shows up under the “Next Steps” section, which offers users personalized advice and tips. However, the app’s key differentiator on mobile is its location-based spending guidance feature. This displays how much you have left to spend in the budget category associated with a particular venue. While certainly it’s certainly a nifty trick to tap into your location via the smartphone’s GPS, the company is touting this unique feature above all else, when really, it’s the access to historical data from that venue that may be the more interesting value-add in terms of location. After all, in Mint’s iPhone application, you can view your budgets by category, too, and it’s not so difficult to figure out (without a GPS), that if you’re buying dinner, that’s to be deducted from the “restaurants” category, for example. Location-based category assignment just simplifies this process. What’s really neat is to see the bar graph of historical spending for a venue in HelloWallet, something that may give impulse shoppers pause before another big purchase. Think of the advantage for gadget-aholics (ahem) who spend far too much at Best Buy or the Apple Store, for instance. The graph is that much-needed visual reminder to slow down. There are plenty of other differences between Mint and HelloWallet, too, even if they’re not highlighted that well within the app. For example, while Mint is focused on tracking your money then recommending associated products and services from its partners, HelloWallet doesn’t allow banks to advertise on its service. It also has more of a focus on getting users out of debt and boosting savings, especially those associated with employer-provided 401K’s. These finance management tools are found in HelloWallet’s Web app, as the mobile version is more narrowly focused on spending and budgets. The distribution models for Mint and HelloWallet are also different. Mint is a consumer-targeted service, but HelloWallet has been selling to enterprise customers who offer HelloWallet as an employee-sponsored benefit. To date, the company has sold over 300,000 memberships to its online service to its Fortune 500 employer partners. And for every 5 subscriptions it sells, HelloWallet gives away one free subscription to a family in need. Since its founding in 2009, HelloWallet has raised over $9 million in funding, led by Grotech Ventures and Revolution Ventures. Current HelloWallet customers can grab the new iPhone app from here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily One of the great pastimes of the Web is rating places and things, but now with mobile phones you can rate them anywhere, and not just things but experiences. Enter Stamped, a New York City startup founded by ex-Googlers that wants to be your go-to app for rating restaurants, books, movies, and music. The iPhone app just launched on iTunes. Stamped simplifies ratings. Gone are the five stars. You either stamp something with your approval or you don’t. But don’t stamp too liberally because you only get 100 stamps to start out with (you can earn more by being active on the service). You can follow what your friends are stamping to get a steady stream of recommendations. The app will also feature suggested users like chef Mario Batali (an adviser to the company) and Rolling Stone movie critic Peter Travers. Share your stamps more broadly on Twitter.Open up the map view to see stamps near you. Put some to your to-do list, add your own stamp. If you don’t want to waste a stamp, you can show your approval with a weaker “like.” The app is comparable to Kevin Rose’s Oink in that it lets you rate things at a very granular level, but it is much more structured than Oink, which is organized around free-form hashtags. Stamped steers users towards rating restaurants (pulled from Google Places and OpenTable),books (pulled from Amazon), movies (pulled from Fandango), and music (pulled from iTunes). If something is not in the Stamped database, you can add it. But for those categories, the app does a great job. You can filter the stream of your friends’ Stamps by category, and often there is the option to book a table at a restaurant through OpenTable or download a song through iTunes. The more you stamp, the more the app knows your interests. Down the line, the company could possibly target offers or ads based on your interest profile for places, books, music, and movies you’ve explicitly said that you like. Co-founder Robby Stein worked as a product manager on Google’s Ad Exchange and co-founder Bart Stein (not related) worked in marketing. The third co-sounder, Kevin Palms, was rescued from a hedge fund. The company is backed by Bain Capital and Google Ventures, and Instagram founder Kevin Systrom (also an ex-Googler) is another adviser. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Washington, D.C.-based video indexing and discovery startup Veenome has raised $500, 000 in seed funding from Ecosystem Ventures (investors in Tube Mogul and Facebook), plus private angel investors from Google, Dingman Center Angels, as well as Chegg founder Aayush Phumhra and the founder of WebMetrics Tim Drees. The company uses proprietary automated video recognition technology to scan video clips for products, brands and objects which can be tagged and indexed. Once identified and tagged, these items can then be linked to associated content elsewhere, like an e-commerce storefront or a social media site. That means, for example, if you liked the sunglasses Lady Gaga was wearing in her latest video, you could just click on them within the video to purchase. Veenome says the additional funding will be used to enhance its recognition algorithms and APIs for its early customers. The company is currently running a beta test with participants who include major global publishers and video providers. At first blush, the new service sounds an awful lot like a video version of ThingLink, the other media-tagging startup that lets you tag photos and images hosted online. However, unlike ThingLink, which requires you tag each item explicitly, the content providers and producers who use Veenome just have to install a plugin on their website to get started. Veenome then crawls their site and overlays the advertising on the videos it finds there. Plugins will be available for the major blog platforms (WordPress, Drupal, etc.) and some custom channels, the company says. This automatic image scanning and tagging functionality is also how Veenome differentiates itself from other video startups that offer tagging, like Viddler, BlipSnips, Vidtaggr, and others. Veenome’s business model resembles AdWords, where interested advertisers and marketers will bid on the tags in videos. Content producers and publishers will share the ad revenue with Veenome (70% publisher/25% Veenome/5% Video Creator). Veenome was founded by CEO Kevin Lenane and CTO David Geller. Lenane was most recently the Director of Mobile Strategy at PointAbout and has product management experience in Web, mobile and location-based services. Geller is the former CEO of Plexstar and of Amazing Media.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMountz on East Coast VCIn episode II of his Founder Stories interview with host, Chris Dixon, Kiva Systems founder, Mick Mountz discusses traversing the country in search of capital shortly after launching his company almost a decade ago. With plans to disrupt the picking, packing and shipping industry, Moutz went shopping for investors on Sand Hill Road and found none. He says “they were retrenching at the time… and not only were they not making investments, I was coming in with a hardware investment and they were like, you are going to need $100-million to get anywhere near cash flow positive, they just wouldn’t touch it.” Mountz turned his attention elsewhere and secured $1.6-million from angel investors. This led to a Series-B, spearheaded by east coast backers who took a different position on his proposition. He notes “they were like wow, $100-billion dollar material handling industry, tell us about how you are going to disrupt this again?” Mountz adds, “Out east my sense is that they are willing to look at more one-off type opportunities.” Drilling down on what accounts for the high concentration of Boston area based companies manufacturing robots, Mountz believes it’s the combination of “technical talent” pouring out of the surrounding universities along with machine shops in the New England area “that can do sheet metal … or stamping of parts” or any necessary work need to bring the robots to life. Make sure to listen to the entire video for additional insights and be sure to catch the first part of this interview here. Past episodes of Founder Stories, featuring interviews with Drew Houston, Eric Ries, Dustin Moskovitz, and Fred Wilson are here. Episode III of this interview is coming up. Disclosure: In the second video, Dixon mentions Harvest Automation. He says Founder Collective (where he is a co-founder) invested in the company. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There are a lot of sites popping up these days trying to make travel recommendations better and more precise. Some, like Triposo, are making travel apps based on algorithms, while Trippy wants to give you social, “friendsourced” recommendations via Facebook, or rapidly growing sites like Gogobot, which provides a gamified, Yelp-like platform where you can leave reviews of destinations you visit and get recommendations from your friends. These are all great options, but sites like Trippy, CouchSurfing, and more are off-Facebook platforms that connect to the social network through Facebook Login. A new travel site launching today, called Twigmore is cutting out the middle man and launching a travel network directly on Facebook. Twigmore Co-founder and CEO Stephen Smyth tells us that many feel that travel network is a natural extension of the Facebook platform but they don’t want to sign up through an off-site application to get their recommendations.  Smyth says that, with Twigmore, he wants to put people, not places, at the heart of a travel platform; while most travel websites focus on places, offering pictures of hotels, restaurants, etc., Smyth says that it’s not only friends and people we inherently trust that give us the best travel recommendations — the best insight and tips come from people who actually live at these destinations.  The problem is, however, that it’s hard for travelers to find trusted locals who can answer questions, show them around, or just help when things come up. Twigmore wants to tackle this obstacle by connecting travelers with locals through friends. That’s where the co-founder thinks they can gain a leg-up on other travel sites: By helping travelers find real people on the ground wherever they travel. On Twigmore, when a user is planning a trip to Berlin, for example, they may discover that a friend knows someone who’s currently living in the city. If the traveler likes live music, with a couple of clicks through their Facebook profile, they can discover what kind of music the person likes, get introduced to the local contact for a scoop on concerts, and perhaps even go see a concert with the person when they get to Berlin — and make a friend in the process. What’s more, Twigmore users can get notified if other friends are going to be in the city at the same time. Smyth says that the idea for Twigmore was inspired by the Facebook-focused professional networking approach of Branchout, which is basically like LinkedIn for Facebook. In the same way, Twigmore wants to become Lonely Planet for Facebook.  Twigmore also wants to offer its own recommendations for things to do when people arrive at their destination, a starter kit, if you will. They’ve just begun adding features there, and have started with Groupon Deals for some discounted activities for people to during their stay in 100+ U.S. destinations. Smyth also said that he wants the product to be 100 percent personalized, and thus far users can only interact with friends or friends-of-friends in Twigmore — no strangers to be found. He also said that he sees an opportunity (a la Airbnb) for the platform to become a place where people can find homestays with trusted friends (and friends-of-friends) while they’re traveling so they can save money on hotels and lodging.  Twigmore was founded in October 2009 in New York City by media executives Stephen Smyth and Peter Baer, formerly of Thomson Reuters and Warner Brothers, respectively, and in just a few months of beta testing, Twigmore users have already built a database of over 1.7 million local contacts in over 38,000 cities around the world.  The startup has raised $275,000 to date from angel investors including Shaun Abrahamson (investor in Zocdoc, Trialpay), ex-Googler Ien Cheng, and Glenn Asano.  For more, check out the site on Facebook here. Let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Kinect has proved fertile ground for hackers and innovators all over the world, from individuals to student teams to established researchers. But as yet there haven’t been many commercial applications. Microsoft and TechStars are hoping to turn the creativity and momentum associated with the Kinect into some functioning startups. Applications are being taken through January 25th; ten will be chosen and given the opportunity to participate in a three-month incubation program at Microsoft — and get $20,000 in seed funding. Got an idea for a new device, service, or method of using the Kinect’s low-cost real-time depth sensor? This could be a good opportunity — if you can afford to move to Seattle for a while this Spring. Don’t worry: the program is in the downtown area, not Redmond. There are minor catches. TechStars, in exchange for funding and leading the program, will be getting a 6% stake in your new company (in common stock). And it’s not just a way to put the finishing touches on a game you’ve been working on. The goal is “to create businesses that leverage the Kinect for Xbox or Windows.” And since the Accelerator is based in South Lake Union, there will likely be daily rumbles with Amazon employees, who consider the area their exclusive territory. Clearly, the idea is to package and monetize some of the creative energy going into the platform. It seems like a good fit for the student engineering teams we’ve seen that likely put their devices together with university tools. Travel to the Emerald City, get some expert help and learn your way around the SDK, and get a shot a creating a business. Microsoft doesn’t get to keep any of your IP or anything, but it’s no secret that you’re essentially working for them. What’s good for the Kinect is good for Microsoft. There are more details and a FAQ at Microsoft, and TechStars has a blog entry as well. The application form is here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMick Mountz on Disrupting ShippingAfter electronically ordering a shredder for your files following a pivot and a case of bottled water to wash away lessons learned, you may have set in motion one of Mick Mountz’s Roomba like robots to fetch the items for you in a warehouse that uses his Kiva Systems technology. The interconnected hardware and software package is designed to streamline the process of picking, packing and shipping e-commerce products for delivery. A former Webvan employee, Mountz saw an opening to create efficiency after noticing warehouses were geared towards transporting bulk items of similar products to retail stores, but not designed “to get one red, one green and one blue in a box.” Utilizing his system, robots scurry about the floor locating individual items before transporting them to workers who pack and ship. Mountz claims the process accounts for “two-to-four times as many orders per hour as they have done the old way” (dispatching workers to find products) and says over the “last couple of years we have been growing at over 100% a year.” Average price per system? $5-million dollars. Below, Mountz describes how Kiva’s software communicates with the robots. In essence, “we have a wireless wifi conversation with call it thousands of robots in the warehouse and they are checking in with the host system for path planning and route management instructions, and just job instructions in general.” Scroll to about 2:25 in the second video to see the robots in action and make sure to check out the entire clip for additional insights. Past videos of Founder Stories featuring Eric Ries, Alexis Ohanian, David Karp, Kevin Ryan, Drew Houston and many other founders are here. Episode II of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily An odd but interesting new photo-and-video sharing iPhone app called Chumkee is officially announcing its public launch today. I know, I know. Another photo-and-video sharing app – just what you need. But Chumkee is doing something a little different here with its concept, user interface and design. This app isn’t about simply “sharing photos with your friends.” It’s about sharing publicly, in an almost Twitter-like format, complete with @usernames and a “reply” feature. In other words, social conversations based around photos and videos. But that’s not all. The app also ditches the traditional Twitter timeline-esque view for a photo pile design that allows you to move pictures and videos around on the screen or drag them off the side of the screen when you’re done. When you first load Chumkee, you’re presented with the “everyone” view which is a heaping stack of photos and videos. The videos have live thumbnails, though, which gives the app a sort of “real-time” feel. It seems like all those people are chatting live now, even though that’s not the case. Although the app supports photos, the majority of the thumbnails I saw upon first launch were videos. You can move these thumbnails around on the screen to discover the ones hidden underneath or you can flick them off the screen when you’re done. While this is not a design that allows you to consume a large amount of media at a glance, it’s actually kind of fun to use. There’s a goofiness and playfulness to Chumkee that so many of today’s apps are lacking. That said, if photo piles are not your thing, a monkey holding a joystick at the bottom of the screen (yes, I told you it was goofy) lets you switch to a tiled layout. When you find a video (or photo) you want to see, you just tap it, then tap “zoom” and watch. You can also “like” the item or follow its creator by tapping the included “follow” button. The app’s users are given @usernames, like on Twitter. To see just the people you’re following, tap the drop-down box at the top of the screen to switch between “Everybody,” “Following,” “My Profile,” and “Search.” As on YouTube, the app supports video replies to prompt conversations between users. This is done via the “Cam Reply” button at the bottom of each item. (Test replies are also supported). Even though it’s not built around live chatting, Chumkee has that same sort of random, serendipitous and voyeuristic vibe that Chatroulette once offered before things went bad. It would be great if, at some point in the future, you could “go live” and have real-time chats, too. Of course, then it would face that same Chatroulette porn problem. In the meantime, it’s less likely you’ll see the naughtiness of Chatroulette (prior to its cleanup) here now, but there is a “flag” button if you do encounter something odd. Chumkee is the creation of New York-based C-Vibes, Ltd. It was previously soft-launched for beta-testing purposes, gaining 15,000 users worldwide, 85% of which now engage daily. The app was built by David Aumoier and Thomas Prevot, whose backgrounds are in creative, design and investing. Currently, Chumkee is boot-strapped with support from a few angels. You can grab the app in iTunes here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Pushpins, the mobile app for saving on groceries, is relaunching as Pushpins 2.0, now a fully featured grocery shopping assistant. Previously, the app was focused only on delivering savings in the form of digital coupons and rewards to users who scanned UPC barcodes at the grocery store. With the update, the app offers everything a grocery shopper needs, including digital shopping lists, coupons, nutritional information and even access to your shopping history. Pushpins plays in a crowded but popular, space: mobile shopping lists. I’ve personally tried several of these apps myself, in hopes of finding a favorite. Grocery IQ, ZipList, AisleMapper, Cozi and many others have all spent time on my homescreen over the years. Although I can’t personally benefit from it (thanks a lot, Publix), one of Pushpins’ best features is its integration with the store savings cards from many brand-name grocery store chains like Foodtown, Giant Eagle, Harps, Lowes Foods, MainStreet Market, Marsh, Shop ‘n Save and ShopRite. When you clip the digital coupons using the app, those savings are instantly loaded onto your grocery store loyalty card for use at checkout. In the new app, Pushpins also offers a smart shopping list that can intelligently suggest coupons for the items on your list. For example, if you add “Chex Cereal,” the app won’t just tell you if the cereal is on sale – it can tell you if there’s a coupon for milk, too. In addition, you can sort products by aisle, view nutritional info and access a history of your past purchases and savings via the shopping history feature which can be printed out as a digital receipt. The updated app is out now in iTunes here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily UserVoice, the maker of customer engagement tools, today announced that it has raised $1 million in equity funding. The round was led by Baseline Ventures, with contributions from Western Technology Investment, The Accelerator Group, Tekton Ventures, Dharmesh Shah, Mike Davidson, Peter Lehrman, Shan Mehta, Aayush Phumbra, and Reza Hussein. The startup raised $800,000 of seed funding back in May of 2009, bringing total investment to just under $2 million. According to Richard White, Founder and CEO of UserVoice, the startup’s products, like UserVoice Feedback (a hosted tool for gathering and prioritizing product ideas directly from a company’s customers) and Helpdesk, an easy-to-use ticketing system that lets companies solve more customer service problems in less time, have led to 75,000 signups and 40 million user interactions. The San Francisco-based startup is growing rapidly, he said, so in order to support its growth, UserVoice is opening a new engineering office in Raleigh, North Carolina. “Being from Raleigh and very familiar with the wealth of engineering talent it was a natural fit to have an office there”, White said. With its new funding in tow, the startup is planning to build out its development, design, and sales teams over the next few months as well.  Since its founding in 2008, UserVoice has essentially become a hosted way for SMBs to intelligently process the feedback they receive from employees and customers through a social and game-ified idea generator, where they can suggest ideas, vote on others, and get quick feedback. It’s an effective way for software companies and web app developers to incorporate feedback tools into their product websites, extending feedback channels to give users an easy way to voice their thoughts on new features, roadmaps, etc. Through products like Instant Answers, businesses can cut back on the amount of time they spend responding to customer questions and problems, as the tool pulls matching articles from companies’ knowledge base and instantly sends that info to customers to answer their product questions, etc. UserVoice also offers widgets so that companies can get customer feedback directly from their websites, and iPhone SDK to embed a complete customer service solution with a single line of code, as well as a Facebook app so that fans can submit, discuss, and vote for ideas within the company’s Facebook page. Companies like Seesmic, Posterous, Meebo, Miso, Rapportive, and HootSuite are currently using the startup’s customer engagement tools to streamline their customer relations and to diversify the ways in which they’re receiving feedback from their customers. (You can check out HootSuite’s integration of UserVoice’s feedback solution in the image below.) For more on UserVoice plans and pricing, check them out at home here. One additional note: UserVoice Founder and CEO Richard White, will be hosting a Fireside Chat on Monday, November 21st at 8:30 am PST, in which interested parties can ask the CEO questions about the funding round and what the future will look like for UserVoice.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Venture capital firms put more money into US startups at higher valuations in the third quarter of this year versus the second, according to a new report out today by law firm Fenwick & West, with Internet and software firms accounting for some of the biggest gains. But the overall venture environment is looking “schizophrenic,” Fenwick partner and report co-author Barry Kramer tells me today. “The amount of money invested by VCs continues to be more than the money they raise, and that’s not healthy or sustainable for an extended period.” Despite venture firm fears, including uncertainty about effects from Europe’s financial issues and US government intervention in the economy, up rounds — where a company’s valuation was higher than the previous round — accounted for 70% of all fundings in the quarter. Only 15% of fundings were down from previous rounds, with 15% flat. In contrast, Fenwick had previously found that only 61% of rounds were up in the second quarter, with 25% down.  Splitting up the quarters also obscures the relatively slow funding process, Kramer notes. Fundings can take months to get finalized, and some of the upward changes last quarter could have been due to decisions made in the second quarter. Still, it’s particularly striking that relatively early companies — those raising their second venture rounds — had the highest proportion of gains, with 89% up of their rounds going up. Venture firms typically invest with the intention of getting liquidity in three to five years. The fact that that they’re putting the money that they have into companies now shows they think their investments are going to make them money down the road despite all the fears. There’s a big caveat here, though. Kramer says that one company, which he isn’t disclosing, had a 1500% up round, and if it were excluded from the data, up rounds would have only been 54% of the total. Readers, tell us in the comments if you know who this mystery company is. Fenwick, which pulls a variety of other sources in addition to its own research, cites recent DowJones VentureSource data showing that traditional venture firms as well as corporate investing arms put a total of $8.4 billion into 765 deals in the U.S. over the quarter, which is up 5% from the $8.0 billion invested in 776 deals that it reported for the second quarter.  All this funding is coming in spite of larger concerns about the world economy and the opportunity for startups in it. “Valuations are continuing to increase while VCs are professing reduced confidence in the future,” Kramer observes. The report references the Silicon Valley Venture Capitalist Confidence Index, produced by Professor Mark Cannice at the University of San Francisco, which indicated a drop in Silicon Valley investor confidence. VCs in aggregate reported a 3.41 confidence level on a 5 point scale last quarter, down from 3.66 in the second quarter. Finally, it’s worth noting that there’s a mix of results coming on how the quarter went. For example, the DowJones VentureSource data doesn’t fit with follow an earlier report put together by MoneyTree, Pricewaterhouse Coopers and the National Venture Capital Association. That one had shown VCs investing $6.9 billion across 876 deals, down from the $7.9 billion invested in 1,015 deals in the second quarter. The numerical discrepancies between the reports are partially due to methodology differences, like whether a company is in Internet or software, or whether an international firm gets only its US investing activity counted. The more important point here is the trends that each show, Kramer says — and the relatively high investments in the face of larger economic fears and liquidity questions is what’s odd. You can find the full report here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s Demo Day for Gazelle Lab, the new Tampa Bay-based TechStars Network member, which is seeing its first class of startups launch this morning in downtown St. Petersburg, Florida. The accelerator, based on the successful TechStars model, was founded in early 2011 with three goals: build an entrepreneurship community in the Tampa Bay area, create a seed stage pipeline (something notoriously lacking in Florida today) and create more jobs. Despite its struggle to register as a tech hotspot, there’s actually a fairly sizable tech community in the Tampa Bay region – it just doesn’t always involve early stage startups like the ones you would see featured on sites like TechCrunch. Developers here often seem content to work at larger firms, like in banking, healthcare, and of course, given MacDill’s presence, for the military. With Gazelle Lab, that may soon start to change. The Lab was founded by Brent Britton, Bill Jackson, John Morrow, Marvin Scaff and Daniel James Scott, all of whom bring considerable knowledge and experience to the startups who participate in this 3-month program. Britton has been helping companies for more than 20 years in Boston, San Francisco and the Silicon Valley, New York, and Florida. Bill Jackson is a Professor of Entrepreneurship and Innovation and the Director of the Sustainable Entrepreneurship & Innovation Alliance at USF St. Petersburg’s College of Business. John Morrow is the Entrepreneur-In-Residence with the Sustainable Entrepreneurship & Innovation Alliance at USF. The experienced software entrepreneur and technology innovator Marvin Scaff and entrepreneur and author Daniel James Scott round out the group. Ideally, the startups that launch here will remain here, bringing much-needed jobs to the Tampa Bay area. That may prove to be a challenge – after all, as many VC’s will still tell you that your startup’s location still matters. A lot. But in reality, kick-ass companies can be built anywhere, so it may as well be Tampa Bay. Tampa Bay: where the housing is affordable, the white sand beaches can be enjoyed year-round and where others’ tourist attractions are just our weekend activities. (Yes, Tampa resident here. I like it, too). Tampa Bay has another benefit which Gazelle Lab happily taps into: the University of South Florida. The accelerator is a part of the Sustainable Entrepreneurship & Innovation Alliance at USF St. Petersburg’s College of Business, which means it’s in a unique position to leverage the expertise of the student and faculty’s expertise. As a part of the Gazelle Lab program, the startups are asked tough questions by USF entrepreneurship majors who help the companies with their due diligence. And, as a TechStars Network member, Gazelle Lab has access to other TechStar resources, including mentorship and hosting deals and discounts. It also offers the usual benefits of an incubator, like free office space, local mentors, legal assistance and, of course, seed stage funding. Each of the companies gets up to $18,000 ($6,000 per founder) in exchange for Gazelle’s 6% stake. The group is now looking to raise a $3 million dollar fund which will keep the program going for another five years. Based on this first round of startups (below), that investment may be worth it. And now, the new launches: AutoIQ.co is built around solving very common points of pain for drivers like, “what does my check engine light mean?” and “who do I trust to get it fixed?” The service combines automotive diagnostics, mobile technologies and data analytics to create a “health record” for cars. Drivers use an easy-to-install hardware device ($29.99) to get access to engine diagnostics while an accompanying mobile app provides additional service record scanning, plus trusted referrals from your social networks and AutoIQ’s network. Consumers dump their service record receipts in a pre-paid envelope, which AutoIQ digitizes and inputs in the app. The apps and service record scanning are free, but when a provider match is found, they pay a modest messaging fee to contact the consumer in need. Started in August, AutoIQ’s Android app and service are in private testing now. More mobile platforms and broader beta testing is scheduled later this fall. Although there are many competitors (CarMD, AuotMD, etc.), AutoIQ sees them as potential partners for programmatic access to the historical car “health” data it collects from customers. Dropost.it wants to change the way you share gifts by allowing users to drop gifts for friends at a given location. These gifts are somewhat like virtual gift cards that show up when you visit a particular venue. The service uses the geolocation capabilities in modern smartphones to know when you’ve arrived, and will then ping you about the money your friend left for you. For example, you show up for dinner at a favorite restaurant and get a message that says, “happy anniversary, this meal is on us…love mom and dad.” This message can be written out or recorded as a video. The service works on top of PayPal for now, but plans for mobile wallet integration are on the company’s roadmap. The potentially interesting part to Dropost.it’s offering is how it recommends which gifts you should buy. The service accesses social networking data from Facebook and soon, Foursquare and Twitter, to make suggestions as to the venues and merchants your friends favorite. Kngroo wants to help you discover your city by way of an urban scavenger hunt application that uses game mechanics. Players receive trophies and gold, redeemable for deals and gifts, for their interactions with locally owned and operated businesses. In addition to being a fun game, Kngroo is also a powerful marketing platform for local businesses. Merchants can sign up for a premium account to access the demographic data Kngroo collects on their customers and can customize the experience of their location using the company’s “Tools For Engagement.” While not entirely novel, the new app presents an interesting mix of local discovery (e.g., Foursquare Radar, Gowalla) with check-in deals and scavenger hunts (SCVNGR, Shopkick, etc.). Teburu is a complete online platform for small-to-medium sized restaurants that allows them to better serve and connect with their online and mobile customers. Customers can order from any of the restaurants’ locations over the Web or from their smartphone, as well as place reservations, receive coupons and newsletters and more. Restaurants using the service can then increase revenues (in testing, Teburu saw increases of 25%) by making pickup and delivery orders easier and more accurate. All this is run through inexpensive Android-based tablets or through the restaurants’ existing POS, if the restaurant desires. The tablet can either print out a ticket or can be used alongside the POS system for manual entry. The system is currently in a closed, live beta with five chains and is raising capital for expansion and scale. Although other solutions exist for facilitating the online/mobile ordering process, they are typically expensive or are managed by third-parties who handle orders by sending them to the restaurant’s fax or email.  Red Hawk Interactive Inc. has created an e-commerce, white-label platform that allows content creators (home fitness, education, college sports, independent Web series, kids content and more) who normally distribute content over DVD to make it available through streaming media platforms via a subscription service. Content creators can upload their video to one platform (Red Hawk) for distribution to other devices like Boxee, Roku and Apple TV. By creating these micro-channels, Red Hawk Interactive Inc., wants to enable companies to monetize their content while also giving consumers instant access to the content across a wide array of mobile, tablet and other devices. The company is currently working with sports training video producers and creators of other unique content to secure distribution rights. PropertyManagementdirect.com is a new service offered by Leads Direct Inc, a pay-for-performance Internet lead provider for niche service-based verticals. PropertyManagementDirect.com connects property owners with property managers in a new way, simplifying the entire process. Property owners use the site to learn about property management, learn how to hire a property manager, interact with other property owners, get advice and find the right property management company for their needs. Property management companies receive high quality leads and only pay for the leads they receive. PropertyManagementDirect.com will launch December 1st 2011, with a soft launch November 15th. The formula will then be replicated across other verticals.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Facebook Pages can host as many applications as they want, but unfortunately, most visitors never click away from the single default landing tab. To let its brand and band clients offer ecommerce, crowdfunding, music, video, and ticketing all within their default tab, marketing platform FanBridge today launches partnerships with 12 developers. Clients can simultaneously integrate functionality from Topspin, IndieGoGo, SoundCloud, Stickam, and Songkick, and other partners into the free FanBridge Fan Page Creator app. By creating a partner ecosystem, FanBridge can become the hub which aggregates other apps rather than having to build them on its own. The omni-app’s flexibility and name-brand partners could help FanBridge pull clients away from Facebook Page management titans such as Buddy Media and Vitrue, whose brand client typically display multiple separate apps on their Pages. At its core, FanBridge Fan Page Creator is about reducing friction inherent in the Facebook Page tab application system. Page visitors land at one app, but have to use the small navigation menu on the side of the screen to visit others. They rarely go to the trouble, so brands are typically left to either define their identity with one app that doesn’t tell the whole story, or go to the trouble of frequently rotating the default app. Fanzila tried to solve this through a creating multi-feature app, but it’s building all the modules on its own rather than picking the best providers of commonly requested  functionality. FanBridge presents an easier cross-app experience for users that could translate into more engagement, conversions, donations, and more actions that benefit brands. FanBridge’s VP of Product AJ Magnuson explains that its partners have all developed high quality standalone apps, but that “some have had trouble gaining traction or just want to focus on core functionality” rather than building out other features or a full content management system. Integrations with FanBridge give them added distribution without much additional development work. Clients of FanBridge can add their content and determine which partner functionality to show through a CMS dashboard. Soon, FanBridge will be aggregating data about partner feature usage from across the Pages it powers to give clients recommendations about which functionality will work best for them. It hopes to pull in clients with the free app, then upsell them on subscriptions to its social marketing suite and other services. Facebook has classically done a poor job with app discovery, for both users and Page admins. Through its ecosystem FanBridge can act as a curator, giving brands access to only the highest quality apps, and relieving them from having to choose whether visitors will first see their ecommerce storefront, video channel or another app. I’ve listed the 12 partners and their functionalities below, and developers can now apply to join the FanBridge ecosystem.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Poaching talent through the “acqhire” model isn’t just for giant consumer-facing web services. BLiNQ Media, provider of social ads tech to agencies including Havas and Starcom, tells us that yesterday it acqhired the founders of social media data and analytics firm Looxii. Daniel Upton and Adam Rice’s company provided search, monitoring, and sentiment analysis of big social media data sources, while BLiNQ licenses white-labeled tools to ad agencies for buying ads through the Facebook Ads API and other social services. As advertising on social services incorporates more social context and brand mentions, the ability to pick out and amplify positive mentions will become crucial to BLiNQ, and Upton and Rice will help. Looxi will continue to operate. A few years ago, successful social advertising meant developing high quality targeting and creative combinations, then A/B testing them. But Facebook is now moving more towards Sponsored Stories that amplify word of mouth, and Twitter’s ad products are centering around trending topics. Knowing what ad targets are saying is becoming just as important as who they are. BLiNQ needs talent that can make sense of the conversational firehoses, and these new hires have a background that will allow them to deliver. On the specific role of the new hires, BLiNQ Media co-founder and CEO Dave Williams says Daniel and Adam will be “developing simple-to-use user interfaces and rich data visualizations that filter social media KPI’s (key performance indicators), such as demographic information, interests information, online influence, and sentiment. These measurements will help the brands we work with gain better intelligence, so they can more effectively measure what is working in their social campaigns — and what needs adjusting.” [Image Credit: Samdobrow Photography via Examiner] Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in August, Y Combinator debuted its largest (and I’d say most stellar) class of startups to date. One of those companies is now ready to fully peel back the curtain and launch its app into the public fray. Vimessa is a free video voicemail app for the iPhone that allows consumers to send high-definition video messages to any mobile phone number or email address. And, unlike FaceTime, iMessage, MMS, and other video messaging services, the app works on all mobile devices and desktops, including feature phones, smartphones, and tablets.  What’s more, users don’t need to have Vimessa installed or even own an iPhone to receive these free high res messages, they can access them through a simple link. However, because it’s faster to send, receive, and view messages for those who have the app installed on their phones, iPad, Android, and Windows Phone apps are on their way. Vimessa CEO and Co-founder Peter Clark said that he thinks the value proposition of his startup is that it offers a fast and convenient user experience — one that’s similar to texting — but holds more visual and emotional power thanks to video. Vimessa users can share an experience, show a place, invite others to join them at an event, or just talk about what they’re doing over cellular or WiFi connections. Vimessa also shows which users have Vimessa installed and stores videos securely in the cloud and synchronizes them with users’ mobile devices. Of course, thanks to MMS, sending video messages via mobile devices doesn’t seem like a new idea, but current solutions have been predominantly focused on video calling. Vimessa thinks that in spite of apps like FaceTime, this live video functionality isn’t really what customers want. Instead, users want to replay and reply to video messages at their own pace. Going slightly against the grain, Vimessa believes, for most synchronous conversations, audio will do quite nicely, thank you.  What’s more, Clark said that coordinating Skype video calls is difficult for people trying to reach international recipients (something that many heavy Skype users know all too well) and traditional voicemails aren’t personal enough. Vimessa takes advantage of the ubiquity of front-facing cameras on smartphones, which has made it exceedingly easy to for anyone to create insta-videos from any location, and hurdles this pain point.  Thus, Vimessa’s ability to send a video message to anyone, regardless of whether or not they have the app installed, solves a major mobile communication headache and gives the app a big leg-up on MMS. It’s also a nice bonus that there is no limit to the amount of video messages one can send through the app. Though it’s important to point out that video messages will “self destruct” after two months; however, users can choose to store their videos “forever” for an affordable $19 per year. But for Vimessa to really kick ass, it will need to add some key features, like sharing conversation threads on Facebook and Twitter, send pre-recorded video stored on smartphones, group messaging, and video transcriptions.  In the big picture, considering text messages look about the same today as they did ten years ago and the ease of video recording only continues to improve, these kinds of easy, device and platform agnostic video messaging solutions are sure to be a big part of the global communication infrastructure going forward.  For more on Vimessa, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Spotzot, the platform that powers deal targeting for shopping applications and web sites, today announced that it has closed $2.2 million in Series A funding. The round was led by Cervin Ventures, Inventus Capital Partners and TiE-Silicon Valley Angels.  So what is Spotzot? Simply put, the startup enables brands and retailers to reach new customers by way of promotions and coupons that are displayed across a growing network of shopping apps and sites, which include ShopSavvy, Shopkick, CardStar, and Geodelic — to name a few. The startup searches thousands of sources each day for both in-store and online promotions that are valid at over 400,000 merchant locations; it then organizes and categorizes those deals and delivers them through free publisher APIs to power things like loyalty programs, comparison shopping, and local checkins. Put another way, Spotzot Founders Bobby Jadhav and Sanjay Mittal told us that, each time a publisher makes an API call to access Spotzot offers, the startup anonymously captures the consumer’s unique ID, along with the location and intent based on product category, merchant, keyword, mall, and brand. By tracking the ongoing buying behavior of each visitor on publishers’ mobile apps and websites, Spotzot is able to present consumers with a personalized experience that should present with deals from their favorite brands, items, and merchants nearby — wherever they go. And, for advertisers, this enables them to engage customers with contextually relevant content, i.e. promotions, ads, or offers. The Spotzot founders believe that their technology can be disruptive because it offers a depth of deal content that ties together in-store and online deals and delivers them in ways that are personally relevant to consumers — which, in turn, should result in higher CTRs and conversions.  In early testing, the team said, 45 percent of shoppers who clicked on a merchant page demonstrated so-called “purchase intent” by clicking on the same deal at least twice from different locations — once while researching and again when visiting the store. If Spotzot can maintain this high consumer intent and engagement at scale, this could prove to be an effective way for brands and merchants to better target their customers and improve campaign performance — something that every ad and deal solution strives to accomplish.  As for its series A, Spotzot said that it will use its new infusion of capital to accelerate the growth of its targeting platform and to fill out its sales and engineering teams. For more, check out the company at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily YCharts, a startup that provides stock research, tools and analysis, has raised $3.25 million in Series B financing led by investment research company, Morningstar with participation from existing investors including the Hyde Park Angels, I2A, and others. This brings YCharts’ total funding to $4.75 million.  YCharts provides free stock analysis tools and charts that give investors a quick, comprehensive long-term outlook on their holdings. The site lets them understand the real value of their holdings in the long run by comparing dividend yields, total returns (not offered by Yahoo Finance) and around 75 other metrics, with the ability to compare against other holdings. The beauty of YCharts is that it digs into past long-tail data that’s publicly available from a variety of sources, such as P/E ratios, R&D spending, or cash flows, and graphs these over time. YCharts, which does not offer opinion-based analysis, seeks to provide investors with comprehensive, objective information on the companies behind the stocks, allowing them to make the most accurate decision for their portfolios. YCharts currently offers three products; YCharts.com, YCharts Pro and its chart creator tool for third-party sites, journalists and bloggers.  For a monthly fee, Pro users gain access to YCharts’ quantitative analysis strategies that objectively rate the stocks covered. The service has grown from 30,000 users to more than 400,000 users in slightly more than a year.    The funding will be used to build out the startp’s team, scale infrastructure, increase marketing efforts and expand the scope of its financial research and analytics. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This video was posted about ten days ago and is in the process of going viral. How do I measure “viral”? Do I have a yardstick? No, it’s simple. When my mom emails me a website or a YouTube clip, that’s my litmus test. (She’s not exactly an early adopter.) And, what’s more, it’s fairly unusual for TED Talks to go viral. At least this quickly, especially on the YouTubes. The video is already sneaking up on one million views. For those of you who don’t know what TED Talks are, all you have to know is that if you want to teach yourself about the way the world works (and/or should work) and you only have time to visit two video sites, go to TED Talks and Khan Academy.  The reason for all this “virality” talk? The newest round of TED Talks features a 12-year-old app developer, named Thomas Suarez, talking about his life and what brought him to coding at a relatively young age. Sure, he’s not the youngest coder out there, nor probably the best for his age, but he’s remarkably confident for a young guy (and an impressive public speaker) — and he’s out there building things and educating his friends (and teachers) about technology in the process.  Inspired by Steve Jobs, his parents, and Apple’s release of its SDK, he started to code and learned Python, Java, and C “just to get the basics down”, he says. Suarez makes iPhone apps, notably an app called Bustin Jieber, which is a “whack-a-mole” game in which you pummel the Biebs. If you don’t think that’s awesome, then something may just be wrong with you. He also recently started his own company, called CarrotCorp.  In his talk, the young app developer discusses how students are becoming a valuable source of information about technology, especially for teachers, and should be allowed to assist in developing technology curricula in schools. Hopefully talks like this inspire younger generations to take up coding and get involved in creating new technologies — not just new apps — but apps and tools that address those real, seemingly insurmountable problems. Bustin Jieber and Suarez prove that app development, coding, and design are, on the whole, becoming increasingly accessible both to young people and those without CS graduate degrees. Even if his apps aren’t gold-caliber, he’s 12-years-old. We talk a lot about the U.S. “no longer making anything”, but if more kids like Thomas take up the reins, the U.S. and the world at large will no doubt be better off. So check it out:   Latest headlines delivered to you daily With no shortage of products and services that target small businesses in a generic way, some verticals really do need dedicated solutions — like personal trainers, for example. Never having really thought about it myself, I asked a few of my friends to find out what tools their personal trainers use to manage their day-to-day operations. The answers ranged from old-school methods like notebooks and written invoices, to techier methods that peaked at Excel and emails. Coachya, founded by husband and wife team Avi and Michal Grabinsky, is bringing to market a management suite that bundles a number of key features trainers need, into a single one-stop-shop solution. To be more specific, it seems perfectly suited for personal fitness coaches, or any other kind of coach that provides workout schedules to individual athletes (customers). What I like most about Coachya is that it doesn’t overload in features or is too fancy a design. It just streamlines the basic activities trainers need to perform when managing athletes. Features range from registration management (from single customers, to teams), to athlete billing, to training plans, assignment and tracking. Nice touches like prebuilt workout libraries that can be dragged-and-dropped onto athlete schedules are real-time savers. Trainers can track athletes’ progress by having them log into Coachya as well and plug-in data such as distances covered, speeds, durations, and physical conditions like weight and minimal heart rate. Team management is also made is via a shared calendar and feed and the ability to designate assistant coaches/trainers. Also, athletes can be connected to multiple coaches and teams. For example, someone training for a triathlon may have both running and cycling coaches. Coachya is offered in three tiers, ranging from free to $59/mo. Steroids not included. I kid. I kid.Latest headlines delivered to you daily The daily deals space continues to morph with each passing month, and we all have our fingers crossed that it is indeed maturing. (Even though some would prefer to see the space vanish altogether before that happens.)  With few barriers to entry, everyone and their mother is launching a daily deals site these days. For example: Yipit releases a sometimes-monthly report on the movement and flux in the space, and this report collects data from more than 650 deals sites. Yep, over 650. Of course, the total number of deal sites fluctuates each month, as in July, for example, 38 deals sites closed their doors — compared to 36 new sites launched. (You can check out the August report here.) There’s also consolidation happening in the space, as the troubled BuyWithMe (which has been vying for the rank of third largest deals site with Gilt City, Travelzoo and Bloomspot) is rumored as an acquisition target for Gilt Groupe — and the company itself acquired its sixth company in September. Groupon continues to lead the space, with its recent IPO and current $15 billion market cap. Earlier this month, we covered a new deal aggregator and deal map entering the space called “deel.io”, which was founded by former Google engineers and one of the early engineers at HarvardConnection (later known as ConnectU), which was founded by the Winklevosses and Divya Narendra in 2002. The young startup has since changed its name to “The Dealmix”, but its mission remains the same: Recognizing that the deals space has become chaotic, “almost to a point of annoyance”, they said, The Dealmix is trying to bring a bit of organization and simplicity to the wild and woolly deal market.  In spite of the chaos, the founders think that daily deals still have significant inherent value, and they want everyone to get the most out of deals, so the team put together this infographic which seeks to answer the question, “what daily deals site are you?” They’ve included some of the space’s most recognizable players with an easy flow chart to help you discover the right site for you. Because we know that you NEED to know. Check it out below, and chime in with your suggestions.  Excerpt image from The University of Minnesota’s Bio-Med Library Public Services Blog Latest headlines delivered to you daily Swag. Short for “Swagger”, is what rappers and the youth of today call style. And now you can get it delivered to your door. Swag Of The Month is a new $9 subscription service that lets men receive t-shirts and other clothing items that match their preferences from independent fashion designers. Today it raised a $100,000 Angel round from Quattro Development to legitimize the previously bootstrapped business. Dressing cool is about to get easier. The subscription fashion model has taken off amongst women. ShoeDazzle has raised a baller $60 million from investors including Andressen Horowitz, Polaris, and Lightspeed. BeachMint is rumored to have been valued at $150 million when it raised $23.5 million in June, and its site BeautyMint got 500,000 visitors its first day. The concept of disconnecting fashion from actually shopping is also gaining steam with men. Trunk Club raised $11 million in September for its high-end service where men pay retail prices for fancy $48 polo shirts picked out by Skyped-in fashion consultants. If low-end, long-tail men’s subscription fashion can become anywhere near as popular as these services, Swag Of The Month’s angels are going to feel pretty damn smart. The ShoeDazzle and BeachMint model doesn’t seem broken, so Swag Of The Month’s founders Erik Huberman and Austin Smith didn’t  fix it. Subscribers fill out a style preference survey, pay the fee, and are guaranteed a cool piece of clothing in the mail each month. Shirt not as swag as you hoped? Return it for a different one. The service launched last month on pocket change and now has 300 paying customers. Retailers give Swag Of The Month their clothes for free as an alternative form of marketing. Huberman explains that getting your clothes worn is a much better strategy for a fledgling designer to gain exposure than buying ads for a label no one’s heard of. The supply of designers is plentiful around Swag Of The Month’s Santa Monica, LA office, and subscriber fees go towards shipping costs. I frequently talk to men who want to dress better but dread visiting stores, trying things on, and spending a lot. Swag Of The Month makes men look cool with none of the work and at a fraction of the price. I mean, seriously, you can’t get a cool t-shirt for $9 anywhere, and sometimes the service mails out jeans or winter wear at no extra cost. T-shirts are light, but Swag Of The Month will still have to streamline fulfillment eventually to boost margins. For now, the $100K will go towards day-to-day operations, marketing, web development, and designer partnerships. I’m a big believer that successful women’s lifestyle startups can be dumbed down and repurposed for men. For example, Where Is The Cool whittles Pinterest down to just a home page, and I think Swag Of The Month has much bigger potential. If it can keep the preference survey breezy, men won’t think twice about paying $9 a month to say, “This right here is my Pretty Boy Swag.”  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It always annoys me when I want to make an appointment, whether it be for a haircut or a doctor’s visit, and I go online to make said appointment only to find that the company or provider doesn’t offer eBookings. You would think that, if airlines have managed to do it, most businesses might have followed suit by now. Online scheduling software enables customers to book appointments from their browser, reducing friction for them, and streamlining workflow for SMBs. And, hey, even Siri can schedule appointments. Of course, for SMBs, adding a scheduling option to their website can be a pain in the ass. Or, at least the prospect of building a calendar app/module can feel like a pain in the ass. Which is why there are companies like Genbook, which offer local merchants the ability to automate their appointment scheduling through cloud-based software that can integrate with SMBs’ existing software — or allow them to introduce that capability. Genbook’s solution adds a “BookNow” button to merchants’ websites and Facebook Pages, so that customers can scroll through available times, schedule and confirm their appointments with a few clicks. The online appointment and CRM platform is accessible from any computer, iPad or iPhone or Android smartphone, and for merchants, Genbook automatically collects and publishes customer reviews to help promote local merchants within their communities. And they’re genuine reviews, not just canned comments. While Genbook has competitors like Schedulicity, Appointy, and BookFresh, each of which offers a similar service with varying limitations on how much functionality you’ll get for free (Genbook is free for 30 days, and then it’s $20 a month after that), the startup seems to be having some success. (Even though a lot of startups have opted for freemium plans to monetize, and I’d like to see Genbook do the same.)  Today, Genbook is announcing that it has scheduled over 10 million appointments for SMBs in the U.S., and has scheduled more appointments in 2011 than in any of the four years it’s been around. Just in October, local businesses scheduled 500,000 appointments.  The cloud scheduling platform has attracted 5,000 customers, which it says consists of businesses like massage therapists, spas, photographers, chiropractors, etc. — obviously any small company that requires appointments to do business.  And for those SMBs, as one can imagine, this can have a positive effect on their bottom lines, as scheduling software that lets customers book in realtime, at any time of day, can prevent no-shows and reduce friction. What’s more, plugging that capability into a social network via Facebook Pages, for example, extends the reach and can presumably provide a boost to customer acquisition. And at less than $250 a year for solo operators and less than $500/year for SMBs, it’s not a bad deal. For more on Genbook, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mark Armstrong founded his site, Longreads, in 2009. Using Twitter hash tags, the site simply aggregated user’s picks for the best long-form non-fiction on the web, offering a poor man’s content curation engine. Now, two years and thousands of stories later, Armstrong will be joining Nate Weiner’s Read It Later as editorial director, where he will collect and curate content for that app’s users. “Over the past two years with Longreads, I’ve learned so much about the importance of ‘time-shifting’ in helping make long-form content more accessible to more readers on the web. Read It Later now has nearly 4 million registered users, and I think there’s an incredible opportunity for publishers, curators and creators to use the platform in new and valuable ways. That will be my focus,” he said. “We’re in a golden age of storytelling right now on the web, and I think Read It Later is in a perfect position to support that work, across all major platforms. We’re excited about what’s next.” Mark (pictured) was the former director of content at Bundle. He noted that while this is a paid position with the company, he will continue running Longreads, supporting it through reader donations and subscriptions. Read It Later completed a $2.5 million funding round in July, including investments from Foundation Capital, Baseline Ventures, Google Ventures, and Founder Collective. The service has just under 4 million registered users and over 250 apps connect to Read It Later for offline reading. The Android and iOS apps see about 10,000 downloads per day. Mark and I started talking shortly after he launched Longreads. We would routinely have conversations about the space and our views on where it was headed. We never had an agenda or were working together at the time, but just enjoyed the thoughtful discussion. He just got it,” said Weiner. “So this year, after I raised and grew from one to many, Mark and I talked again and realized it was the perfect time to bring him on board. Mark is now helping forge new paths with publishers, writers, and developers who are interested in changing the way people consume articles, videos, and content online and off.” Luckily, even with all his responsibilities, Armstrong will still have a moment to peruse some long-form non-fiction. “Longreads is continuing as it always has: It’s an independent four-person company, and my role with Read It Later will allow Longreads to expand and improve our service to the community. Read It Later has been a huge supporter of Longreads since the very beginning, and what we do is very complementary. Also, in case anyone’s wondering, I’ve always operated Longreads alongside other content strategy work — so, yes, I’ll still have plenty of time to read,” he said. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ticketmaster screws artists and venues by charging big service fees that scare away customers. Chicago-based FanFueled thinks it’s time event ticketing and marketing platforms stop gauging and start adding value. That’s why it’s just raised a $1 million seed round led by Listen LLC and angel William Lohse to provide ticketing at 1/3 to a 1/4 of Ticketmaster’s service fees. It also plans to one-up Eventbrite with its referral system that lets event promoters track social sharing of ticket links and reward those driving the most sales. At one point, a stable, scalable ticketing system was worth paying for, but that technology is more widely available now. Ticketmaster’s exorbitant service fees, around $17 on top of an $100 ticket, are ridiculous. FanFueled charges just a $3 fee on the same ticket, and also offers a peer to peer marketing system. Unfortunately, the government foolishly approved Ticketmaster’s merger with Live Nation last year, facilitating exclusive ticketing agreements with the giant venues and artists the megacorporation owns and manages. This protects it from disruption. However, discontent amongst smaller bands and concert halls is brewing, and eventually Ticketmaster’s exclusivity agreements will require renewal. If it can think long-term, FanFueled has a chance to take a chunk of the massive ticketing market, warranting the seed round bet. In the meantime, FanFueled is competing with EventBrite, which recently closed a $50 million Series E round and provides do it yourself ticketing at a reasonable 5.5% + $1 fee. Other competitors also taking a shot at the ticketing throne include Ticket ABC which simplifies refunds, and Ticketfly which provides deep analytics. FanFueled’s strategy for beating these companies revolves around its referral rewards system. Fans share a tracked ticketing link, and promoters can reward those who inspire the most sales with merchandise, backstage passes, tweets from the band, or whatever they want. FanFueled even tracks downstream sales multiple degrees of separation from the original sharer. Artists and venues can profit from incentivizing valuable word-of-mouth referrers with rewards that cost them little or nothing. FanFueled now has 10 full-time employees, and has handled ticketing for some bigger regional music festivals. It has had success with its rewards model, with 20% of customers sharing ticketing links. Founder and CEO Anderson Bells rages “The whole ticketing business model is to exploit fan passion. It’s a broken model that discounts tickets at the last minute and penalizes the biggest fans that buy tickets first. Why not harness that passion rather than exploit it. With FanFueled, the sooner people buy their ticket, the more rewards they earn. We’re saving clients marketing costs while enhancing their relationship with the fan.” It will be serious uphill battle, and subsequent funding rounds may be necessary to give FanFueled time to gain momentum. But I think smaller players in the music scene are rooting for a ticketing revolution, in pricing but also in adaptation to social. Ticketmaster and Live Nation’s monopoly are not rock’n’roll. FanFueled might be.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Because getting to the first million is the hardest, stealthy new startup Seed Edition is launching a subscription billing platform designed specifically for seed stage companies. And it’s giving it away for free. According to Co-founder TJ Laher, it’s never been easier for two guys in a garage to build a product using Amazon Web Services, Ruby, etc., but it’s never been harder for a startup to make money. “Competitors move faster, customers want everything for free, and monetization is an operational nightmare,” he says. “95% of startups never make it past the seed stage, and it’s not because of the Series A Crunch.” OK, but what’s the deal with giving away Seed Edition’s services for free? That’s $100 million in services, or so the company claims. Ah yes, there are a couple of caveats. Seed Edition isn’t giving the product away for free indefinitely – it’s giving it away for free until the startup in question has made its first million in revenue. In addition, the free deal is only being offered to 100 beta testers who sign up as Seed Edition early adopters. The company says it wants to support the next “Google, Facebook, Apple, or Zygna,” so startups aren’t being chosen on a first-come, first-serve basis. They have to be approved. While the company’s founders won’t discuss the exact criteria being used to judge, the general requirement is just being an early stage startup. “We envision two guys or gals in a garage, or a dorm room, or coming out of an incubator like Y Combinator,” explains Seed Edition C0-founder Ben Wu. For those who don’t get access to the free service, the company plans to offer additional promotions or discounted pricing to seed stage startups in the future. As for the service itself, it’s a fairly comprehensive offering that includes customer subscriptions, lifecycle management, invoicing, notifications, analytics, product pricing and more. One of Seed Editions first beta testers, PaaS service provider MCF Technology Solutions, has blogged about their experience, explaining in more detail how everything works and the challenges Seed Edition helps the overcome. The results are positive, writes CEO Govind Davis: Seed Edition makes the entire process extremely simple.  PayPal and Authorize.net gateways are supported so you simply get the appropriate account and enter credentials in the Seed Edition setup interface.  It’s then an easy process to create a subscription model, add clients with regular payment patterns and begin billing on a regular basis.  For more advanced use cases, Seed Edition provides a robust API to automate account and subscription creation, and to generate payment inquiries.  The user interface is simple for billing staff and powerful for reporting and management activities. Seed Edition has signed up around 20 companies so far, and is now trying to get the word out to more. However, Laher says the company is still operating in “double stealth mode,” so they won’t discuss their funding situation or what appear to be their Zuora ties. Given that Laher and Wu are still listed as Zuora employees on LinkedIn, and Zuora’s Danny Borelli and Dexter Hart are also listed as Seed Edition staff, one has to wonder about the Zuora connection here. “We want both our product and our vision to speak for themselves…,” Laher says, in an attempt to explain the startup’s secretive nature, “we are focusing 100% of our launch efforts on helping seed companies succeed in making their first million. Anything else is a distraction.” Companies can apply for Seed Edition via its homepage here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Evernote is today introducing its first stand-alone product since Peek: a browser extension called Clearly that enables “distraction-free online reading”. Only available as a Chrome add-on for now, Evernote Clearly removes ads, links, navigational elements and whatnot from any block of text you’d like to read on the Web and lets you easily save it to Evernote to read later. If that sounds a lot like the core functionality of the likes of Readability or Instapaper, you’re probably thinking in the right direction. Evernote Clearly works best when you’re on a page with a single article, like this one. With one click, you can isolate the text block for comfortable reading, and ‘slide’ right back when you’re done. The extension also lets you change the appearance and the size of the characters, so you can somewhat customize the experience (see first screenshot below). In addition, you can clip articles to Evernote with the click of a single button to save articles or later reading. Also, a ‘print’ button. According to Evernote’s blog post, Clearly will even automatically turn a multi-page article into a single page so you no longer need to click from one page to the next anymore, but that didn’t work out for me, as far as the extension I was sent goes (I tried with this post). Evernote Clearly will soon be available for Firefox, too.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just yesterday, we were applauding online retailer Wine.com for finally figuring out that having a mobile app is not enough – you still need a mobile website, too. Today, another big name announces the launch of its own HTML5 efforts: GetSatisfaction. The popular customer support company says its new Web app will bring the full functionality of its online community platform to its now 3.1 million users. At launch, the Web app (currently in beta) supports iPhone users, but support for Android and BlackBerry OS 6+ is on its way soon. According to GetSatisfaction’s internal metrics, over 25% of the company’s users access its online communities via search engine referrals. Over the past year, the traffic from mobile devices has nearly doubled, up from 8% to 15% of total visits. GetSatisfaction has essentially been squandering that traffic until now by not providing a customized mobile experience for these visitors. (The company offers an independently built iPhone app, but it’s for business use, not for consumers). The new Web app will provide an immediate advantage to mobile app makers, who can now link to their GetSatisfaction page from within their app in order to provide customer support. Often, app makers simply provide an email address for reporting concerns, provide a basic FAQ within their app, or worse, ignore the need for in-app support altogether. Now, without a lot of additional effort on their part, app makers can funnel users to GetSatisfaction, allowing them to report bugs, suggest ideas, ask questions and interact with the online community. In total, GetSatisfaction says it has 63,000 communities live on its site, all of which will now be mobile-enabled. That’s up from the 58,000 reported in August, when the company raised its $10 million Series B. GetSatisfaction pages are provided for free, but companies pay a fee to claim and moderate the page, with plans starting at $19.00/month. Today, the company has over 2,500 paying customers, including Proctor and Gamble, Adobe, Spotify, Flipboard and Mint. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s not a bubble until startups are rapping for seed funding.  Mick Hagen, the founder of Undrip, a stealthy startup in San Francisco that is building a service to better filter your Twitter stream, is trying to get the attention of top angel investors with the rap video above.  (Is it really that hard to get a meeting with investors these days?) The video doesn’t say anything about what the startup does other than it’s the “biggest move I’ve made since I dropped outta Princeton” and we’ll be crushin it from NDA to IPO.” They are already “lookin for the future exit strategies” even though they have yet to launch a product.  The chorus, which I do admit is catchy, goes, “We need a angel, We need a ride.” (Full lyrics below).  There is even a red sports car. It’s all about getting noticed, of course, in an overfunded environment.  And if this video doesn’t work, they have 20 more addressed to individual super seed investors.  Ron Conway, the first one should be in your inbox soon (see below—the production quality isn’t quite up to the $4,000 spent on the main video above, but it is personalized). Other investors who can be expecting a personalized pitch in rap form include Ashton Kutcher, Dave McClure, Michael Arrington, Keith Rabois, Kevin Rose, Chris Sacca, and Sean Parker.  Before you completely dismiss Undrip, Hagen was involved as a co-founder of Zinch, a college admissions matching service, which was sold to Chegg.  And at least they are tackling a real problem. Filtering the realtime Twitter stream is something nobody has yet cracked in a satisfying way. If their product is half as slick as their video, it might do okay. Here are the lyrics: Verse 1:Yo this is Undrip baby, comin hot out the kitchenIt’s Mick on the Mic, so you might wanna listenBout to knock the socks off the competitionBiggest move I’ve made since I dropped outta PrincetonI don’t play games like a politicianWouldn’t be here without a value propositionAmbition doesn’t get an intermissionSo I’m swingin for the fences like I did with Zinch andInch by inch, row by rowI’m gonna make this business growAll I need is that seed round doughand the flow from my Undrip fount – Say WordUh yes yes y’all, we’re Thus Fresh y’allA cut above above the rest, obsessed with success y’allYou know I don’t sleep, Cuz it really ain’t RESTfulI’m always on my grind like a mortar and pestle Chorus:We need a angel, We need a rideWe need a bump, a bump so we flyWe’re gonna make that money off of social steamBut we need your help to reach the dreamWe need a angel, We need a rideWe need a bump a bump so we flyUndrip is about to goWe just need an angel to unlock the flow Verse 2:Comin straight outta Soma, the valley of siliconeIn the zone, writing code til we see the break of dawnLearning the ropes from the CEOAnd we’ll be crushin it from NDA to IPOHere we go again, yeah it’s back to bootstrapA lot of young companies do dat do datYou see these other suckas and they moving at a turtle paceBut check the way we run it when we jump over your burn rateNew York never sleeps, well that may beBut we never sleep either, cuz we workin on them qwerty keysLookin for the future exit strategiesIf you sleep on this now, then we’ll see you at the mezzanineReal hot issue, cold hard currencyTerm sheet poppin’ so check check out the equityMister Investor, Mister VCI’m down to take a number, but don’t make me take a knee Latest headlines delivered to you daily You go on vacation, spend a day with the kids, buckle down on a project, and suddenly you’re hopelessly behind on tech news. You could scan back through the pages of your favorite sites, but you’d have little way of knowing which stories were most important. Luckily, Israeli developer Briox has developed a data fusion technology that can surface the most relevant content from a firehose of sources. To show off the technology, it’s released the free Riversip Tech Reader iOS app, which lets users view the latest news, or just the biggest stories from that day or week. Briox hopes Riversip will attract more enterprise customers from health, finance and other verticals to pay for help managing information overload. Riversip is designed to aid those not constantly wired in to other news reading solutions. Techmeme works perfect for me because I check it a dozen times a day for what’s important at that moment. If I take a break, though, I’m relegated to the archives that don’t indicate if a story was the biggest of the day or a less significant item. RSS readers are a mess if you don’t check them frequently, confronting you with an endless stack of headlines. Riversip solves this by letting you choose a timeframe from which to show the most newsworthy articles. It defaults to latest, but users can toggle to view headlines of the day or week. Drilling into an article provides the full text or a link to read it through an in-app browser. A “More Coverage” button shows perspectives on the same news item from other outlets. Users may select topics to create a personalized summary, search for keywords, and share anything they find. The quality of daily and weekly summaries are passable. Riversip picked out new about iOS 5.0.1, Adobe killing mobile flash, and iTunes Match that were indeed the biggest stories of the past week. It doesn’t always choose the most well written articles, though. At one point it picked Mashable as the source of the top 3 items of the week when more thorough write-ups existed. This is a deficiency of a purely algorithmic content curation engine that too heavily weights traffic and doesn’t include human editors like Techmeme. Next, Briox plans to expand into consumer products for more news verticals, and strengthen its enterprise offering. Facebook’s news feed recently began showing the biggest stories since a user last logged in — a strong endorsement of content consumption systems like Riversip that take into account how frequently users visit. One day, people might be able to efficiently follow a wider set of news and interest topics by using data fusion-powered products like Riversip. Latest headlines delivered to you daily IssueBurner, the combination task management and helpdesk solution from Webyog Inc. is now exiting beta and launching as a commercial product. The service, from the data management company behind CloudMagic and Visifire, was originally cooked up by the company’s developers as an internal solution to deal with their own “inbox overload” situation. Last year, the product was launched as a public beta and as since gained over 16,000 users. With the commercial launch, IssueBurner will begin licensing its product on the freemium model. For 2 members and 2 groups, the service is still free, but silver ($19/month) and gold ($39/month) plans are now available for larger organizations.  The way IssueBurner works isn’t entirely novel: you create groups, assign them an email address and then those emails end up in the IssueBurner hosted solution, which is also used as an online helpdesk. Because people can’t seem to let go of using email for group communications, no matter what alternative solutions are presented, IssueBurner works on top of email instead of attempting to replace it. The expected workflow is that employees just cc: or bcc: the IssueBurner group address on those emails that should end up online. If this all sounds vaguely familiar, that’s because it is. To name just a few: CC: Betty, which later became Threadbox prior to its acquisition by MySpace, had the same idea. Back in 2009. More recently, Grexit launched a similar product for Google Apps earlier this year. Others that jump into mind:  Followup.cc, TaskForceApp and Nudgemail. It’s a crowded space. To distinguish itself, IssueBurner’s offering combines its email archival ability with the basic functionality of a helpdesk product, complete with labels, prioritization capabilities, bulk issue management and a mobile interface. The look-and-feel is reminiscent of old Gmail – it’s a sparse but simple UI that ditches the bloat, which is a big plus in terms of efficiency. Webyog was founded back in 2005 and has been profitable since, which speaks well for its ability to get products right. For that reason alone, IssueBurner may be worth a look for those in the market for a simple task management solution. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – ZooZ, not to be confused with ZOOZ Mobile, has raised $1.5 million in funding in a seed round led by lool ventures (yes, that’s really what they’re called). Other investors that participated in the financing round include Rhodium, Kima Ventures, Orefa Investment, Jaina Capital, A.M. Holdings and private investors Eilon Tirosh and Yuval Tal. ZooZ offers a comprehensive end-to-end payment solution that lets mobile app developers easily integrate digital payment and checkout options into their Android or iOS apps through an SDK. The startup claims its payment solution requires only a couple lines of code and minimal development time, but still provides everything that’s necessary for app developers to start accepting in-app payments from end users. Here’s how it works. It’s worth noting that ZooZ is adamant about the fact that it has built its solution with security and fraud detection in mind, and stores all sensitive data in a PCI-compliant cloud environment. The ZooZ platform is being rolled out in an initial, six-month beta phase, during which the service will be completely free. After this period, ZooZ will be charging a nominal fee for processing payments. ZooZ was founded in 2010 by CEO Oren Levy and CTO Ronen Morecki and is based in Israel.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social gaming network PapayaMobile and the value exchange-based mobile ad network Tapjoy are today announcing a partnership that will combine the power of their two communities to help Android users better discover new mobile games. The jointly developed product will be called “Social Marketplace” and it will serve to recommend new games to mobile users based on their popularity among a user’s Papaya friends. In turn, developers will be able to better target consumers with more relevant ads, which means increased opportunity for engagement and monetization. For background, Tapjoy rewards mobile users who install apps with virtual currency they can use within their favorite mobile games. The company’s Personal App Marketplace, which offers customized app recommendations based on user interests, came online earlier this month at http://www.tapjoy.com (that is, when accessed from a mobile browser). The new Social Marketplace will be a dedicated product feature that’s visible within Tapjoy’s Marketplace. When Android users visit the Social Marketplace, they’ll be able to pick out the games being played by their Papaya friends and then download those apps so they can play, too. This new feature isn’t live yet, but will arrive for developers by year-end, the companies say. It will be enabled only for those developers who integrate both the Papaya Social SDK and the Tapjoy SDK into their mobile applications. However, it should be noted that the Papaya Social SDK works to generate its recommendations based on anonymous user data in an effort to protect consumer privacy. In other words, it doesn’t necessarily show you who’s playing a given game, but it will show which games are currently “hot” on Papaya. (See this screenshot for a close-up example of how this will look). Additional information and sign-up details will be made available on both companies’ websites: papayamobile.com and tapjoy.com. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Atomico, the pan-European investment firm started by the founders of Skype, has invested $4.2 million in 6Wunderkinder, an interesting startup out of Berlin that offers well-designed productivity tools for Windows, Mac, iOS, Android and the Web.  They earlier raised over 600,000 euros in early-stage funding. The Series A financing round also comes with additional investment from High-Tech Gründerfonds, an earlier 6Wunderkinder backer, though the size of its contribution to the round remains undisclosed, as does an earlier T-Venture (Deutsche Telekom) investment. 6Wunderkinder offers a cross-platform, cloud-based task management tool called Wunderlist, which enables users to make detailed to-do lists that can easily be shared with friends and coworkers. The company has been hammering away at its next product in recent months though, namely Wunderkit, a platform that provides a central place for individuals to focus on their personal and professional activities, with an emphasis on collaboration.  To receive an invitation to the beta, you can sign up here. I gather that the beta product will be debuted ‘very soon’, meaning at some point in the next few weeks. The Berlin startup’s Wunderlist software has been downloaded more than 3.5 million times to date, boasts 1.5 million registered users and is currently available in 30 languages and over 100 countries.  Interestingly, I’m told that 40 percent of the app’s usage and registrations come from the United States, which speaks volumes to the service’s international appeal. Downloads of the iOS (iPhone and iPad) applications in October 2011 were almost double what they were 6 months ago in the US, 6Wunderkinder says, so evidently the company is going to use a big chunk of the fresh capital to try and boost further growth stateside. Latest headlines delivered to you daily So the Kindle Fire shipped Monday, and the early reviews are out in full force. The reactions, as per usual, are varied. But, for what it’s worth, The Fire is already the best-selling item on Amazon, and many are now saying that the eCommerce giant could sell 5 million of its new devices by the end of the year. No, it’s not an iPad killer, but people are excited by the Kindle’s touch and Android-based evolution, and at $200 there’s no doubt Amazon is going to sell more than a few. But what’s more interesting (at least to me) than the potential growth of Amazon’s market cap should the Kindle sell like hot cakes, or Apple looking over its shoulder, is how Kindle sales could be a huge victory for one of the little guys.  Pulse, as many are now familiar, is a suped up RSS-style newsfeed aggregator built for the tablet generation. Thanks to its touch-based interface (easy swiping/scrolling), clean design, and visual appeal, the app has gotten a lot of play on the iPad and on Honeycomb. The startup has also struck a number of strategic partnerships with big media outlets, like ESPN, and with deal sites like Groupon.   Now, Pulse’s prospects are even more bright, as the app has been chosen by Amazon as one of the few native, pre-installed apps to be featured on the Kindle Fire. When a Kindle user visits the device’s home shelf, there are four apps that appear to be native on the device: IMDB, Pulse, Facebook, and the Amazon Store. There are 15 more apps in the tab, ten of which are pre-installed and five of which are “suggested” apps, which users have to actively download. Most of the installed apps are things like Contacts, eMail, Audible, Gallery, Help, for example.  Considering Facebook’s Kindle app is actually just a web app that wasn’t even fully designed by Facebook (clicking on it just takes you to m.facebook.com), and Amazon owns IMDB, and, yes, the Amazon Store, that makes Pulse one of the few native apps on the Kindle Fire — and really the only non-Facebook/Amazon native app on the device.  In its blog post today, Pulse said that it is in fact “the only app to be pre-loaded on the device upon shipping”. Obviously, that’s not exactly true, and the post has since been amended to read “one of the only apps to be pre-loaded on the device upon shipping”, but the point remains.  It’s a somewhat surprising vote of confidence from Amazon, which has basically made Pulse the official news reader for its own device that is, by definition, a reader. Of course, the Kindle Fire has a whole lot of new functionality that takes it beyond the “reader” of old and into multimedia, but it’s still a Kindle. More importantly, the device’s newsstand is front-and-center, but most of the content therein you’ll have to pay for to consume. This makes Pulse the de facto free option for news reading, and as long as the app’s user experience is strong enough to hold users’ attention, it’s going to get a lot of eyeballs. Furthermore, when Pulse is juxtaposed with the other front-and-center apps (IMDB, Facebook) and the suggested apps to download (Pandora, Weather Channel, ESPN, to name a few) — one gets a further sense of why this is so huge for Pulse. IMDB rakes in 100 million unique visitors per month, Facebook has 800 million global users, Pandora has a market cap of over $2 billion, and ESPN is, well, ESPN.  Pulse, in comparison, was just debuting on the iPad in May of last year and has only raised about $10 million in outside funding. That’s on the higher side for a startup founded less than two years ago, but against the backdrop of the entire industry and Kindle’s home shelf heroes, that’s peanuts. So, again, whether or not The Fire truly competes head-to-head with the iPad doesn’t really matter — even if the Kindle’s sales were to stop dead at 1 million, that’s still 1 million potential new Pulse users. “We started the year with under 1 million users”, Pulse Co-founder Akshay Kothari told Bloomberg on Tuesday, “and we’ll probably end the year with over 10 million users”. In any other circumstances, that kind of statement would cause some serious eye-rolling or jaw dropping, but if the Kindle Fire takes off, that projection may even be modest. (Today, Pulse is at 7 million users.) And put in perspective, Foursquare, which TechCrunch writes about seemingly every other day, just hit 10 million users in June (27 months after launch) and has raised over $70 million.  So, while the Kindle Fire stands to be a money-making machine for Amazon, it seems that for Pulse, it could be pure gold. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The daily deal aggregation service Yipit is launching its own iPhone application today, allowing users to track deals from over 800 sources, including Groupon, LivingSocial, Gilt City and others. In this new mobile format, the service becomes a lot more useful, and not just because it saves you the hassle of dealing what increasingly feels like deal spam email. Beyond Yipit’s aggregation capabilities, the app’s standout feature is its ability to personalize offers. Never want to hear about mani-pedi’s or yoga classes ever again? Love to golf but hate bowling? Then you just might like this app.  The Yipit app offers a location-based deal map and list view in its “Near Me” section while the “My Deals” section features those deals you would be interested in buying. The app walks you through the personalization process upon first launch, letting you select your city (or cities) from a list, then letting you check or uncheck the deals categories you would like to see. Optionally, Yipit can also alert you to new and trending deals via push notifications. It’s easy to turn this feature off and on via the toggle switch in the app’s settings. Although Yipit won’t bug you with the deal categories you opted out of, you can still browse all your area’s deals from the “All Deals” section, if you choose. This relative newcomer to the deals space company raised $6 million in Series B funding this summer, and at the time it was only aggregating 335 deal sources. Now its up to over 800. Also, in less than two years, Yipit has aggregated over 1 million offers. The company says that 90.3% of deal shoppers will buy from deal sites this year, leading to a potential height of $80-100 million in purchases over the holidays. Now that Yipit’s on the iPhone, it’s definitely poised to get in on that action. Latest headlines delivered to you daily YouTube has become the go-to source for video distribution and hosting, and, to date, the video giant has seen tens of millions of channels created, where users are uploading their video content in droves — by the second. Professional videographers, amateur smartphone camera operators, and everyone in between is taking advantage of the YouTube limelight, many of them through their channels. Of course, while these channels are a great place to store one’s cache of video, maybe you want to create your own independent video site to host your own videos — to take advantage of all those video optimization assets you can’t get from YouTube. A startup called VidCaster, which aims to make online video publishing painless and profitable for individual users, small businesses and enterprise clients alike, recently launched a new feature that allows YouTubers to do just that — for free. The online video platform has released a free plan that brings its site-making and video SEO tools to the YouTube ecosystem to let users quickly create their own branded destination sites. And the best part? VidCaster’s free plan automatically syncs with your YouTube channel, so beyond the initial setup, no maintenance is required. Videos automatically pop up on your YouTube channel once you’ve uploaded them there, and vice versa.  The startup’s first incarnation was a custom content workflow solution that was built for a local San Francisco video media property. VidCaster Co-founder and CEO Kieran Farr said that, after some time, it realized that the video workflow management tool they had created could be turned into a sort of white label service that could be used by all video producers.  Farr said that by providing SMBs and small video producers with the technology to manage their video work flow, hosting, and SEO, they want to let video producers get back to focusing on their content and the creative aspects rather than dealing with technical and workflow logistics. VidCaster joined 500 Startups’ summer batch, where the CEO said that Dave McClure and company encouraged them to focus on their metrics and to consider launching a freemium model to monetize the business. VidCaster had initially launched with paid plans, like VidCaster Silver (at $39 a month) and Gold (at $99 a month), which offer elevated levels of storage, bandwidth, and number of users. After building out their suite of features, the startup has now elected to go freemium with its YouTube plan — in what is seemingly a reverse trajectory for most startups, which tend to start with freemium business models.  Farr said that he thinks that Heroku’s approach to monetization, making the platform open and accessible with most features available for free, is the way to go. Then, if users want deeper functionality or customization, only then does it make sense for them to pay. And so far, it’s been working for clients like Zendesk, Twilio, and Airbnb.  Today, VidCaster’s free plan allows users to choose a professionally-designed site theme, upload their logo, and select custom backgrounds and colors to create a tailored look for their videos. And like their paid plans, the new free plan includes automatic video SEO to direct search results on Google and other search engines back to a user’s domain.  Users of the startup’s free plan can set up their site on their own domain name for $20 a year, though for those users that want to put their logo in their player, run their own advertisements, customize CSS and HTML, etc., VidCaster is pushing those users to sign up for their paid plans.  VidCaster’s one-click video site maker and hosting and management platform has also found appeal among investors, as the startup is announcing today that it has raised $350,000 in seed funding led by Quest Venture Partners.  The funding is part of a larger round that the company is currently raising, which looks to include contributions from several other angel and venture investors. Farr said that the company will use the new capital to hire additional developers and push forward to the point where they can release a full-fledged API so that third-parties can start hacking.  For SMBs, corporate marketers and content producers, VidCaster is a cool alternative to the hassle of having to combine separate content management services, like YouTube and WordPress or Brightcove and Custom CMS, for example. With automatic video SEO optimization, YouTube syncing, one-click distribution to a host of video sites, and analytics, VidCaster could be a great resource for SMBs looking for a quick way to host their videos in a way that’s consistent with their brand. For more on VidCaster, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMeebo Now Reaches 250 Million People Across The WebMeebo’s been around a long time in Web years.  The company was founded in 2005 as a universal IM service.  But two years ago, it introduced the Meebo Bar, a social toolbar that sites could put along the bottom of their web pages that allows visitors to chat with each other, check into websites, and get all sorts of notifications. Well, that was a good move.  Co-founders Seth Sternberg and Sandy Jen tell me in the video interview above that Meebo now reaches 250 million uniques a month, according to Quantcast.  That is up from 200 million just 4 or 5 months ago.  The growth has been astonishing.  The Meebo network is now delivering 5.4 billion pageviews a month, up from about 2.8 billion a year ago. Meebo serves ads against its bar (which get a 0.7 percent clickthrough rate, and people who click spend on average 60 seconds with the ad), and shares those revenues with publisher sites.  The company employs almost 200 people. Sternberg and Jen talk about Meebo’s growth, evolution, and what’s coming next. (Hint: think recommendations based on your interests).   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Bonobos, a web-only premium clothing brand for men, just announced the hiring of Michael Hart, Netflix’s former Director of Engineering for social systems, as CTO. Hart says he wanted to “lead an earlier stage company” and was excited to apply what he learned at Netflix in terms of personalization and social networking. Hart received a BS in Business Administration from Bowling Green State University and worked as a Product Unit Manager at Microsoft. He launched Netflix’s social integration and Netflix API during his time at that company. “Right now I’m doing the standard CTO stuff like keeping the servers running,” he said. “We’re making sure we keep the store running well through Cyber Monday.”  Hart said the real opportunity, however, is using the social graphs of Bonobos’ customer base to assess their needs and plan around upcoming fashion trends. “You can learn a lot about a customer based on their profile,” he said. “Their age, their relationship status, are they going to their first job? Are they east coast, west coast, midwest?” The goal, then, would be to sell more personalized items to Bonobos customers. The company also launched a “pre-order microsite” for their new denim line, selling Cone Denim (Cone is apparently a big deal) jeans for considerably less than almost any other premium denim supplier. The pre-order system has already seen 3,400 sign-ups. Folks who enter their email will receive early access to the jeans. Ce ne sont pas des pantalons Andy Dunn, CEO and co-founder of Bonobos, said Hart would help the brand leverage social media. “Our belief is that shopping will become more social over time. We’re calling this ‘social commerce.'” Dunn said the Bonobos was opening a Palo Alto office in January and that the company is hiring on the West Coast. Hart said working at a clothing start-up wasn’t much different than working at Netflix. “In a lot of ways Netflix prides itself in running like a big startup. The transition won’t be as jarring,” he said. At least he’ll be able to dress well. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Rethink Books has just shared with us news that it has closed a $2 million Series A round led by Ambassador Technologies. The Dallas-based Rethink Books will use the funding for product development of apps including FirstChapters, its eBook discovery and purchase platform, and to cultivate relationships with publishing partners. We first covered Rethink Books last year when it showed us an unreleased tablet eReader app that let users add notes, view notes of friends, and share excerpts. Similar features have since been integrated into the popular eReader apps and devices, prompting Rethink Books to move in the direction of discovery. Its recently released FirstChapters, which lets users scan a physical book or browse popular book lists from the New York Times, Oprah, and more. Users can then read the first few chapters of a selected book, and if they like it, purchase a digital copy through Apple, Amazon, and other online retailers. With the eReader devices such as the Kindle Fire proliferating, the potential user base for Rethink Books’ products is rapidly expanding. The opportunity to earn a share of the purchases that will fill these devices seems to have attracted Ambassador Technologies. Rethink Books’ CEO Jason Illian says “along with the applications that make digital reading more accessible and social, we’ll be focusing on the Christian and evangelical book market.” This sector isn’t typically a focus for Silicon Valley companies, and the company’s Dallas location could give it an advantage in signing partnerships with Christian and evangelical publishers. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, it looks like Intel is really putting its money where its mouth is when it comes to mobile. Intel’s global investment and M&A branch, Intel Capital, today officially announced the creation of its new “AppUp” Fund — a $100 million fund that will be used to invest in startups and enterprises developing apps and software tools for mobile devices and PCs. At the Intel Capital Global Summit in Huntington Beach today, Intel also revealed that Urban Airship and 4tiitoo were the first two companies to receive investment from the AppUpp fund.  As we wrote last week, Urban Airship recently closed a $15.1 million series C round of financing, close on the heels of its acquisition of SimpleGeo, which was once referred to as the “Amazon Web Services” for location-based products. According to Urban Airship, Intel invested in the company’s Series C raise out of its new AppUp Fund; however, it seems that the investor wanted more, as Urban Airship today announced that it has entered into a business collaboration agreement with Intel Software and Services Group as well.  Essentially, this means that Intel’s software and services group will be licensing Urban Airship’s software to embed into Intel offerings, allowing developers to create smart, context-rich apps that take advantage of the startup’s core services, namely: Push notifications, in-app purchasing, subscriptions — and now, thanks to SimpleGeo — geo-location.   For Urban Airship, this is yet another interesting strategic move, as its collaboration with Intel will give it access to the Ultrabook, netbook, and tablet markets through enabling app developers to integrate their services.  Of course, not to be forgotten is the second recipient of Intel’s new mobile fund, 4tiitoo, a German OSV and tablet developer. 4tiitoo’s own “WeTab OS” is an operating system that is optimized for tablets and mobile devices and supports apps from multiple platforms and technologies, including Linux, Java, HTML5, Adobe AIR, Flash, and Android.  As one might guess, Intel said today that its new AppUp Fund is designed to advance innovation (read: mobile technologies) based on Intel architecture, specifically in digital media consumption, context-aware computing, and infrastructure apps. The end goal here is to ramp up development and build out the ecosystems surrounding Intel’s push into Ultrabooks and netbooks. And to that point, the new AppUp Fund is a complement to Intel’s recently announced $300 million “Ultrabook Fund”, by which the company showed that it is making a big bet that Ultrabooks, the hybrid between laptops and tablets, will be the future of mobile computing.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A UK startup called MiniatureMoments has created a fairly unique keepsake for you and yours. These things are 3D-printed negatives that appear when you hold them up to the light. They are translucent and are about as big as a passport photo and custom-designed with your own portrait. The miniatures, especially their size and color, are actually redolent of an earlier era. I could imagine these being made out of elephant ivory or bakelite in Industrial England, giving them a sort of memento mori, steampunk quality that I find appealing. They’re obviously pretty small but you could probably stick it up in a window or hang it around your neck like some mad-eyed Miss Havisham reliving your dewy youth. Each miniature costs $40, shipped, which is steep for a rigid postage stamp. Your call.  Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily As Erick wrote in September, over the course of the last year, Fotopedia has been hard at work at trying to reinvent the photo book for the iPad. To date, the so-called “Wikipedia for photos” has launched seven apps, two of which have been in partnership with National Geographic, and has racked up 5.2 million downloads since August of last year.  In September, as part of turning its attention to creating more magazine-like experiences, it launched the Fotopedia Magazine on Flipboard, which highlights five photo essays each day of the week from the company’s impressive bullpen of high-end photographers. And, today, Fotopedia is launching its eighth app and, in turn, is embarking on a new initiative that aims to leverage its photographic talent to begin creating branded experiences in magazine form, combining advertising with “premium content”. Through a new partnership with Hakuhodo, Japan’s second largest advertising agency, Fotopedia is launching a new global brand advertising initiative that seeks to bring tourism back to Japan. As Fotopedia CMO Christophe Daligault tells us that the company has a strong presence in the Asian market, with 39 percent of its downloads coming from Asia (the highest percentage of any region), Hakuhodo will be using this brand recognition to reach those who have an interest in traveling in Japan. The campaign is built around a new app called “Fotopedia Japan”, which includes full screen, immersive ads carefully presented in what he insists is a “non-intrusive” manner — all over Japan-focused photo essays.  Hakuhodo is looking to establish its client, the Narita International Airport, (the ninth busiest airport in the world), as a gateway to Japan, and will be using Fotopedia Magazine and the Fotopedia Japan app to allow users to explore, discover, and learn about Japan and its culture. The app includes 1,300 photos, interactive maps, and a trip builder to create lists of favorite destinations and help plan trips.    Daligault said that the idea with Fotopedia Japan — and future branded apps — is to create a campaign in which content and the ad message are one (through “native advertising”), as the team believes that this allows them to build a stronger emotional experience for its viewers. Tablets and smartphones are becoming an important place for people and brands to meet around their interests, he says, but of course the challenge is to create an experience that is both positive and relevant for the brand — and for the content itself.  The other key is that Fotopedia, in conjunction with Hakuhodo, was able to launch this in seven languages and 120 countries in just six weeks, something that would be difficult to do with traditional media. Unfortunately, because of the earthquake and resulting tsunami that devastated Japan earlier this year, the country has since seen a significant decline in tourism. Both Fotopedia and Hakuhodo believe that it is through partnerships like this one that they will be able to remind travelers what is so incredible about Japan and hopefully spark a renewed interest in making Japan a tourist destination. Going forward, the Fotopedia CMO said that the company is looking to launch a new, branded app every month, as well as to expand on the breadth of content available in Fotopedia magazines. The team wants to go beyond travel and begin creating apps that are more focused around news. More to come on that in the future.  The Fotopedia Japan app is free and is available on the AppStore here. You can also find the Fotopedia Magazine here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily GO is new mobile application for the iPhone that allows users to broadcast and share photos, videos and commentary with others and post them to a live streaming portal. The app offers real-time access to geo-located, tagged media presented in both a stream and map view.  But does the world need another mobile/social/photo-sharing experience? Well, maybe it does. You see, there’s something different about GO that separates it from the rest: it supports complete anonymity. To be clear, it doesn’t just offer the option to use some clever Web handle instead of an authenticated user account – it actually offers the option to post as “anonymous.” #OccupySocialMedia? Oh yes. In terms of the app’s design, you’re either going to love it or hate it. The app is damn pretty, maybe even a little too pretty, with its overly stylized look-and-feel that can sometimes get in the way of what could be a simpler user experience. I happen to think GO looks hot, but you may think otherwise. To each their own. As for the functionality itself, it’s nothing earth-shattering: post, tag, share. However, when you tap the big pink sharing button, GO offers you the option to “snap” (post a photo), “shoot” (video) or “speak” (audio). It’s a trio of options for media input that your favorite take a picture/apply a filter photo-sharing app may not have. What’s really interesting is GO’s anonymity option, though, which is a key part of the new mobile app’s experience. When the majority of today’s apps are bending over backwards to offer you sign-in options that let you speed up the authentication process via Facebook or Twitter, with GO, self-identification is an option, not a requirement. And while that may lead to users who are probably not “MarkZuckerberg” (yep, he joined), it doesn’t really matter. GO isn’t about boosting your ego via likes and shares, “connecting with friends,” or sharing pictures with your family – it’s about instant mobile broadcasting. It’s about documenting the world without having to disclose that you did so. Despite it’s relatively soft launch (GO went live 11-11-11 without much fanfare), there are already some interesting videos surfacing from the OccupyWallSt movement for whom GO seems custom-built. Of course, GO isn’t the first tool to serve the needs of the this crowd. Apps like the Twitter-esque Vibe have also served the Occupy protesters well in the past. But Vibe is ugly and is mainly used for text. GO does more. Despite its differentiating features, GO will still suffer from the same disadvantage that any newcomer to the photo/video-sharing space does at first: critical mass. However, assuming the need for tools to anonymously document the world don’t die with today’s OccupyWallSt shut-downs, there may be a future for GO yet. GO is the first product from Hollr (not to be confused with Holler), which was founded by Michael Bachman and Justin Dionisio. The two were previously the directors at KURO, a boutique interactive agency based in Long Beach. Hollr has some seed stage investment from Imprint Venture Lab, but won’t disclose the amount. Latest headlines delivered to you daily LivingSocial is now testing a new food ordering and delivery service as a part of LivingSocial Instant, the company announced this morning. At launch, members in the Washington D.C. area can order food from select area restaurants and have the meals delivered to their home or workplace. In conjunction with the restaurant delivery service, the company is also launching something called “LivingSocial Room Service,” which will offer “white glove delivery” from top restaurants, with special amenities and personal touches, like those you would find at a nice hotel. The standard food delivery option offers the ability to order from over 70 D.C. area restaurants, including Wisey’s, Chix, Sala Thai and Shawafel. The restaurants will be able to utilize LivingSocial’s marketing tools in order to link their Daily Deals to LivingSocial Instant, the company explains. For example, a restaurant whose daily deal voucher was offered on a Wednesday can become immediately redeemable on Thursday via the new delivery service. The company also hopes it will entice new customers to join LivingSocial for the food delivery option, and then return for the daily deals.   As for the fancier LivingSocial Room Service, this option will include “high-quality tableware, dining accessories, top-shelf presentation of food and a special after-dinner treat.” (Let’s hope they mean dessert.) Unlike Instant Ordering, Room Service will only be available downtown on Thursday and Friday nights and will feature one restaurant per week. The prix fixe menu will change based upon each chef’s expertise and specialities, as it would if you were dining out at the restaurant that night. Both services are online now for D.C. residents at livingsocial.com/instant. To order, just input your current location and preference (pickup, delivery or dine in). Latest headlines delivered to you daily OnSwipe competitor and TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Pressly is launching today with its first major publisher, Canada’s largest newspaper The Toronto Star. Like OnSwipe or even iPad mag Flipboard, Pressly’s service is designed to give traditional Web content a makeover by making it more tablet-friendly. But in Pressly’s case, it’s not about re-packaging content as a native app – instead, it uses a combination of  HTML5 and customizable templates to allow publishers more control over the tablet browsing experience. At first glance, Pressly, the first real alternative to OnSwipe, looks a lot like its competition. Both services let publishers make their content more digestible for tablet reading. However, according to Pressly CTO Peter Kieltyka, the key difference between the two is what’s under the hood. “OnSwipe started as a way to optimize a WordPress blog,” he says. “But Pressly is more of an engine…it’s like Sencha for tablets.” What he means is that Pressly was built from the get-go to be a framework for building next-generation HTML5 websites, as opposed to a tool where you pump in an RSS feed and it spits out a tablet-optimized site. (Although that’s coming, too – Pressly is launching its own self-serve platform in Q1 2012 that will do exactly that.) At launch, there are currently five templates available to get publishers started with Pressly, but really, anything goes. Publishers who want to maintain their brand can create their own templates, explains Kieltyka, “there’s no limitation over what you see on a page.” In other words, if you can imagine it, Pressly can help you build it. Meanwhile, OnSwipe sites tend to look a little more uniform. (Kieltyka says they look exactly the same. Ooh, burn – let the battles begin!)  “It’s like the difference between a BlackBerry and an iPhone,” Kieltyka says. Yes, they’re both smartphones, they run apps, they let you browse the Web, etc. “But at the end of the day, it comes down to execution.” Pressly is also now offering something else that makes it different from OnSwipe – a consumption model for monetization. Before, like OnSwipe, Pressly would take a cut of the ad revenue. Now, publishers have a choice between that and something like $1 per every 1,000 swipes. This figure is not yet in stone, it should be noted. As for its launch on The Toronto Star, things are going fairly well. Since its debut at 6:30 PM EST last night, Pressly has seen 180,000 flips at an average of 22.6 flips per person. The company says its goal is to reach 1 billion flips per month over the next twelve months. It may get there, too, thanks to a couple of other publisher partners whose launches are just ahead: The Economist Media Group is debuting a Pressly-built site in a couple of weeks and soon after a news-focused NBC property will follow. Tablet readers who want to see Pressly in action from their iPad or Android tablet can do so now by visiting read.thestar.com.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Smartphone games developer and publisher Outblaze Ventures, better known as Animoca, has raised an undisclosed amount of funding in a Series A round led by Intel Capital and IDG-Accel (which tapped its China Growth Fund III). Since its debut in January 2011, Animoca says it has released more than 150 games and education apps for iOS and Android smartphones and tablets.  The company also operates a number of mobile games brands, including Dream Cortex. In just 10 months, Animoca says its apps have been downloaded 40 million+ times worldwide. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kobo has partnered with social music discovery and streaming service Rdio to let users of its just-released Android-powered Vox eReader access more than 12 million tracks while they’re reading. Kobo, which was just acquired by Rakuten for $315 million in cash, says it boasts over five million users worldwide. Rdio is currently available in the US, Canada, and Brazil. In the United States, the Kobo Vox eReader is available in Fry’s stores, and available online from U.S. retailers including Best Buy, Fry’s and Kobo.com for $199.99.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily AudioMicro this morning announced that its celebrity picture marketplace, ImageCollect.com, now boasts more than 3.7 million photos available for download. AudioMicro’s Ryan Born says ImageCollect is quickly becoming one of the world’s largest library of celebrity photos provided by top entertainment photographers, just 8 months after its initial debut. ImageCollect is adding approximately 40,000 per day, with around 2 million photos still to be added. The company is celebrating its rapid growth with a completely revamped website, a celebrity photo API and a new pricing and licensing plan that applies the micro-stock business model of iStockphoto and the likes. Early ImageCollect customers include People Magazine, US Weekly and NY Times Magazine. ImageCollect owner AudioMicro is backed by DFJ Frontier and Fotolia.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re the proud owner of a (actually, pretty much any) tablet computer, you can install Zinio, which bills itself as the world’s largest newsstand. Starting today, you can also install the Zinio app, and thus gain access to its 5,000+ magazines, on Amazon’s Kindle Fire device. Zinio’s app is available now on Amazon’s Appstore, free of charge and just in time for the Fire’s official debut. Good news for new registrants, too: Zinio will be giving those a $25 credit (on any device) that can be redeemed across its entire global newsstand through March 2012. They’ll also be able to read their favorite magazines across dozens of tablets, smartphones and PC devices running all flavors of iOS, Android, WebOS, Windows, Linux and Mac operating systems. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Boundary, a San Francisco startup developing a real-time network monitoring solution, has raised $4 million in Series A funding from Lightspeed Venture Partners, TechCrunch has learned. Boundary’s monitoring-as-a-service offering aims to help dev-ops monitor networks and application traffic flow in real-time, both for public cloud environments like EC2 and private cloud datacenters. Boundary claims its SaaS-based networking monitoring service can be up and running in mere minutes, requires zero hardware probes, and is capable of processing millions of metrics per second. The Boundary platform, though a full-access API, will allows IT professionals to access streaming data and analytics for integration with Jenkins, Chef, Puppet and other existing processes. The company was co-founded by CEO Benjamin Black, who was previously responsible for design and implementation efforts for networking, security, and engineering of Amazon’s website and Amazon EC2. Boundary’s other co-founder, Cliff Moon, was previously with Powerset where he worked on the design, implementation and operation of what ultimately became the foundation for the Bing search engine (Microsoft acquired Powerset back in 2008).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily You may know Dan Porter as the CEO of the free multiplayer gaming and chat platform, OMGPOP, which specializes in making social games,  like Puppy World, for example. What you may not know is that, for the last year, Porter has been managing and curating a free, weekly newsletter called Inside Startups. The mission of Inside Startups, Porter says, was to move people from larger companies and corporations into up-and-coming startups in an effort to galvanize the New York City startup scene. The conceit, too, is simple. If you’re looking for a job at a startup or know someone who does, simply sign up (for free) and Inside Startups will email you five great startup jobs available in New York City every Saturday. (Although cities like Philadelphia, Washington D.C., Boston, San Francisco, New York, and Atlanta are now included on Inside Startups’ website.)  Even for those not actively looking for jobs, the founder says, it’s a great way to stay on top of the startup scene in your city — and around the country. As Porter says on Inside Startups:  I was having trouble finding great people to hire. Job boards were static and consisted of people looking for jobs, and recruiters were expensive. I wanted to find the best people, the people who already had jobs, and get in front of them in a low impact way. So the team set out to build a comprehensive mailing list of every person in New York City who worked or wanted to work for a startup. Then we signed up over 200 startups and began sending out our weekly email. So, after sending out hundreds of jobs over the course of the last year and seeing its community grow to now include 5,000 subscribers, 250 hiring companies, and a 50/50 developer-to-business split in NYC, Inside Startups decided to launch a comprehensive analysis of the click-throughs in the postings it sent out in its newsletter in an effort to answer one of the biggest questions facing founders and startup teams looking to hire: “What are the attributes of a killer job posting?”  Last week, Porter and company produced a report based on its data that offers five tips to help startups be more effective in their hiring (and avoid common misconceptions and fallacies), because, after all, finding the right people can be the difference between life and death for a fledgling company. For starters, Inside Startups found that the top three skill sets available that received the most click-throughs (in proportion to other types of jobs) were business/finance, communications/social media, and software/web development — in that order. The company’s short-list of recommendations for startups when creating their job postings and going after new talent? Focus on press and traction over investors, keep it short, remember the interesting perks, sell the job more than the company, and stay away from using “ninjas” or “rockstars” to reduce the lame-ness factor. For a longer look, check out the top five below:        Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s been a bit of a debate going on of late among venture capitalists and investors over whether or not web startups are currently experiencing a cash crunch when it comes to early-stage and series A financing. (You can read Alexia’s recent breakdown here.) As per usual, the answer depends on whom you ask. This recent debate contrasts with the data seen in Column Five Media’s infographic from June, which showed venture funding and investment levels picking back up in the first half of 2011, poised to storm back to pre-2008-collapse levels.  Of course, the data showed that not all tech sectors were experiencing the boom times: Health and medical-related investment, for example, was on the low end, receiving only 3 percent of venture funding over the last year. Yet, there may be some evidence that investment in the digital health space may in fact be heating up. Looking at this data compiled by new healthtech startup incubator Rock Health, we see a list of 41 healthtech startups have been funded in 2011. CrunchBase’s data, which uses slightly more generous paramaters for defining “health tech”, puts that number over 120 or so. Of those startups that were founded this year, Aza Raskin’s Massive Health raised $2.25 million in seed funding from Andreessen Horowitz, Charles River Ventures, and more. (Well, Massive Health was actually founded in December 2010, but close enough.) And Azumio, which was founded this year, raised $2.5 million in seed funding from Founders Fund and Accel in July.  What’s more, we just covered 100Plus’ $500K seed raise from Founders Fund earlier this week. The personalized health prediction startup was not mentioned in Rock Health’s list, I assume because it is still in private beta.  But the point is, as we’ve seen in Dave Chase’s series of guest posts, the healthcare industry is ripe for disruption. Sure, the industry has a long way to go, but we’re seeing some great progress from startups like Practice Fusion, for example, which is busy becoming the largest provider of electronic medical records in the industry.  There’s also plenty of room for help in the way of incubators. On Friday, Rock Health, the startup accelerator for health-focused startups, hosted its Demo Day at UCSF Mission Bay, where the 13 startups in its latest class introduced their businesses to 250 attendees, among them investors from Accel, NEA, Khosla Ventures, True Ventures, Benchmark, Kapor Capital, SV Angel, The Social+Capital Partnership, Founders Fund and more. For those unfamiliar, Rock Health provides seed funding ($20K grants, without taking equity), office space, and mentorship to entrepreneurs that want to break into healthcare. We covered their debut here. The thirteen startups that demo-ed range from BitGym, which makes motion-sensitive iOS video games for working out; to IDEO-spinoff Omada, an online support group to reverse diabetes; to CellScope, a smartphone plugin designed to remotely diagnose ear infections.  It was also great to see that these teams included entrepreneurs that have previously worked in other areas of tech and media and are now bringing their talents to health: For example, Gabe Vanrenen, the former Founder and CTO of Flurry, Jackson Wilkinson, the former head of UX for Posterous and LinkedIn, to Jeff Lieberman, the host of Discovery Channel’s Time Warp.  Again, we covered the initial eight Rock Health startups that were ready to introduce their wares back in June, and you can read about them here. However, five of the startups were not yet ready for the limelight, so we’re providing brief introductions to those below: Bigevidence provides clinicians focused access to the universe of medical evidence at the point of care and within electronic health records, improving quality of care, while reducing costs and risks. BitGym thinks you should be using video games to exercise. Their patent pending technology uses an iPad to turn any cardiovascular machine into an interactivegaming experience. Cake Health is the best free way to manage your healthcare expenses online. The startup was a finalist at TechCrunch Disrupt San Francisco in September. You can read our initial profile here. Crohnology is a social health network for people with chronic medical conditions to share and learn what treatments work, meet others near them, and track and share their health. Heartbeat is a salesforce.com-like enterprise solution for wellness professionals that aims to empower people to be successful doing what they love. Applications for Rock Health’s next class beginning in January 2012 are open until Wednesday, November 16th. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Brands are increasingly turning to Facebook both as a place to advertise and as a complementary platform by which to build their online presence — and begin conducting social commerce. There are a number of solutions, for example, that allow big and small operations alike to operate retail storefronts on Facebook, sell their wares, and, to a degree, manage their transactions.  But what about that other popular social network, Twitter? The “micro-blogging” platform has certainly become a vehicle for celebrities and brands looking to hawk their products, stir up brand awareness, and interact with their customers, so the question becomes: Why can’t Twitter, too, offer some of the same eCommerce functionality as Facebook?  There are a number of reasons for this, but for starters, Twitter has been largely focused on doing one thing well above all others: Building the best realtime communication platform the Internets has to offer. There’s also the fact that Twitter has privileged a “consistent user experience” and hasn’t always had the best relationship with third-party developers. Thus, brands have typically used Twitter as a somewhat indirect broadcast platform, listing items for sale, but only doing so in a way that is intended to lure customers away from Twitter to their own eCommerce platforms. (Facebook has also struggled to keep commerce and transactions happening on its platform, rather than suffering from redirection to retailers’ homepages.) But Chris Teso sees a big opportunity for direct eCommerce on Twitter, which is why, in July, he launched Sell Simply — a simple way to enable consumers and brands to buy, sell, and transact on Twitter. Essentially, Sell Simply turns Twitter into a eMarketplace, allowing users to buy and sell anything over Twitter by replying “buy” to any listing Tweet.  Users can list an item for sale on Sell Simply, or import their items from other commerce platforms, like Etsy, Ebay, Craigslist, ArtFire, or Bonanza, and automatically tweet those items out for sale. All users have to do is connect their Sell Simply accounts with Twitter and PayPal, so when someone responds to that tweet with “buy”, Sell Simply facilitates the transaction through PayPal, enabling users to buy and sell an item with one tweet. (Re-tweets, too, are transactionable.)  Beyond allowing consumers and brands to sell directly to their customers on Twitter, the startup also offers its users the opportunity to create their own storefront. Through Sell Simply’s “Simple Shop”, users can aggregate all the listings for items being sold on Twitter so that users can find them all in one place. They can also add descriptions, tags, photos, and edit a number of other fields for each listing. What’s more, the platform has a fully automated shipping calculator, which allows sellers, for example, to set their own shipping options in prices so that shopping costs can be included in the listing price, or can be set for “local pickup only”, etc.  And, as mentioned above, Sell Simply has a Chrome extension to make it easy for those already selling items on Etsy, Ebay and more to import their listings. To make the process of buying and selling direct on Twitter device agnostic, Sell Simply has launched Chirp, which now allows users to pay anywhere with any device. To make a Chirp payment, all users have to do is send a tweet that says something like “@SellSimply #pay @ThePayee $200 for [said item]”. Users can make payments that are as little as $1 or as high as $2,000. (And this is how Sell Simply makes money: The startup charges a 2 percent transaction fee on every one of those purchases.) This allows brands and sellers to collect money in under 1 minute, direct to their PayPal accounts. Detailed PayPal receipts are then automatically sent to the buyer via direct message so that they have an extra way of making sure that the transaction has been completed.  And, in terms of security, since all transactions take place through PayPal, customers have no liability for unauthorized purchases when they meet PayPal’s requirements, and, in turn, can take advantage of refunds for incorrect orders or items that never arrive.  Since launching in July, the platform has racked up over one thousand members listing over 10,000 items for sale on Twitter, and Teso says that 75 percent of Sell Simply’s members have connected their PayPal and Twitter accounts to the platform, which he sees as encouraging evidence that people are ready to take that leap of faith and begin using Twitter as a direct sales platform. So far, the average transaction price has been $35 and the most common items being sold are vintage clothing and photography, (as many users are coming from Etsy), but he expects the merchandise to diversify as more people begin connecting to the platform. As for the road ahead, Teso plans to launch a “T-commerce” platform designed to expand Sell Simply’s possible uses for brands, with features that will include integration with back office e-commerce workflow, analytics, and a recommendation engine that will suggest items based on what a user Tweets about, for example. For brands interested in this kind of functionality, Teso said, there will be a licensing fee. Obviously, for brands, the value proposition both for Sell Simply’s current offerings and the marketplace features that will be launching by the end of the year could be huge. If you’re a brand, Twitter is the perfect platform on which to broadcast flash sales and time-sensitive deals, and Sell Simply’s buy-with-one-tweet service will make that even easier.  And for non-profits, Sell Simply uses the same formula for transactions to turn Twitter into a donations platform as well, allowing people to donate their charities of choice with one tweet.  Just as brands hope that using Facebook as a social commerce platform can help create scale so that a larger audience will see cool products or sales because users post those items on their wall or share them with friends, Teso said that he sees a similar opportunity for eCommerce on Twitter.  If one happens to be selling their bike on Twitter through Sell Simply, there’s a good chance that a user’s friends will re-tweet the listing, and their followers may follow suit. If those people then, in turn, re-tweet to their followers, well, you get the point. Suddenly your listing might be reaching the eyeballs of someone in a fifth degree of separation, to which they can reply and instantaneously purchase the item. And with Chirp, that can all happen while you’re on the go.  It’s like Square, but you don’t need an extra device (a Square) — or a credit card. Pretty cool. Check out Sell Simply at home here and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The newly launched shopping discovery app Zoomingo announced today it has secured $1.3 million in funding from early-stage VC firms Naya Ventures and Benaroya Capital along with several prominent angel investors. Previously self-funded, Zoomingo says it will use the additional capital to enhance its current mobile application, build a retailer platform and grow its community through expanded outreach to customers and retailer partners. With this funding, Dayakar Puskoor, managing director of Dallas-based Naya Ventures, will also join Zoomingo’s board of directors. For background, Seattle-based Zoomingo was founded by language learning service Livemocha’s co-founders, Shirish Nadkarni (Zoomingo CEO) and Krishnan Seshadrinathan (CTO). Nadkarni said he had the idea for the service when he noticed that his wife (an avid shopper, he says) was having trouble locating nearby sales using her mobile phone. So many of today’s apps focus on barcode scanning, deals and offers or price comparisons, but none simply rounded up all the nearby sales at local retailers in one easy-to-access mobile application. Hence, Zoomingo. The app pulls in sales data from major retailers using a combination of manual and automated means as well as crowd-sourcing via its “Deal Scouts,” who are positioned in several major U.S. cities. Zoomingo now provides access to 70,000 retail outlets in the U.S., and growing. The app is available on both iPhone and Android. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The music lover’s social network Flowd, which recently arrived stateside after its European debut, just updated its mobile applications with a boatload of new features that make them worth a look. Up until now, Flowd was only mildly interesting, as it was primarily touting its 600 or so artists and DJs who had signed up for the network – a number which, in the grand scheme things, is merely a drop in the bucket of all things music. But with the new mobile apps, Flowd is now aggregating artists’ activity from other social networks, including Twitter, YouTube, SoundCloud and Last.fm, allowing users to access artist updates, bios and gig calendars, even if the artist is not on Flowd. Although in testing, this added import/aggregation functionality didn’t mean that every artist profile page was now filled with data (it was still sort of hit-or-miss), there’s certainly more information than before. Plus, it should be noted that the problem with filing out profiles through automated means could be affected by the simple fact that some artists don’t have gig info online right now. In other words, nothing to pull in. In the updated Flowd mobile apps, there are nifty Twitter-esque “follow” buttons which let you quickly build a stream of updates from your favorite bands in order to get details on new concerts and other news. In a way, the Flowd apps can serve as a Twitter client for those interested in music, without you having to…you know…actually use Twitter. Also new in today’s app updates (iOS and Android) is a feature that lets Flowd scan your device to see what music is currently being played or the last track played. It can then post that info back to Flowd and optionally cross-post it to Facebook or Twitter. It’s not as elegant as the Spotify + Facebook integration (or MOG, Rdio, Rhapsody, etc. + Facebook), but it can serve as a path for social music sharing for those old-school people who still like to purchase MP3’s from services like Amazon or iTunes instead of paying for a music subscription. (And yes, there’s a lot of those people left yet). The Flowd mobile apps are available for free on iTunes, Android and Ovi (Nokia), but the app updates are on iOS and Android only. Flowd is a portfolio company of Digia Ventures, the venture division of leading Finnish technology services firm Digia, Plc with offices in Helsinki, Finland and Santa Clara, CA. Latest headlines delivered to you daily An SEC filing surfaced this morning, showing that Chegg has made a yet unannounced acquisition for at least $1.1 million worth of common stock. The company that Chegg acquired is called Flux Software Co. according to the filing, or shortly ‘Flux’. To be clear, we’ve confirmed that Chegg did not purchase enterprise software company Flux. We’ve confirmed with a Chegg spokesperson that, rather, the company snapped up a mobile app development firm called Flux Software Co. as well as a web-focused software development studio called 3D3R, although I gather these are actually two separate entities that share the same people. The founder of the companies is Ohad Eder-Pressman (site), also co-founder of Appsto.com. His software development and consultancy firm 3D3R has done work for a number of big companies, including Yahoo, Nokia, Current TV, Boxee, Metacafe, Badoo and Alcatel-Lucent. You can learn more about the services 3D3R provides here. In a statement, Chegg President & CEO, Dan Rosensweig states: Chegg is always striving to offer students the very best tools to save time, save money and get smarter. In that spirit, we recently acquired Flux Software Co./3D3R, which is an incredible engineering and design team focused on helping Chegg deliver the dynamic user experience students expect today. Pontarolo declined to discuss the specific terms of the acquisition and to provide more details about the reasoning behind the deal. Chegg has raised a total of $219 million to date and recently purchased Web tutoring service Student of Fortune and lecture notes and study guides service Notehall in cash-stock deals. Latest headlines delivered to you daily “Klout is sort of a pass/fail. It’s almost not relevant whether someone’s a 70, 90, or 40, because it’s different than a 10.” says brand presence management platform Vitrue’s Director of Product John Nolt. Despite these suspicions about the exact accuracy of the influence scoring system, Vitrue today launches a Twitter moderation tool with a deep Klout integration. The tool allows brands to see the Klout scores of people replying to and mentioning them so they can prioritize response to high scoring influencers. So while our writer Alexia Tsotsis claims that “nobody gives a damn about your Klout score“, Vitrue thinks its brand clients will. “As long as it has some basis in reality, then it’s useful”, Nolt told me. When I asked Klout’s biz dev director Don Hoang why its system was unable to identify Alexia as having less real world influence than TechCrunch founder Mike Arrington, he gave me the cop out answer “We believe the philosophy that everyone has clout.” The company will need a better response than that if it wants its APIs picked up by more brand presence management and customer rewards systems. Vitrue was previously focused on Facebook Page management. It has provided publishing and wall moderation software as well as application suites to clients such as American Express, McDonalds, AT&T, Disney, and YouTube. Vitrue has also offered Twitter publishing for a few years, but will now help brands keep track of responses to their updates. On its expansion to providing more Twitter services, Nolt explained with a mixed zoological metaphor that “Facebook is the 800 million user gorilla, but they’re not the only fish in the sea.” Considering that brands often cross-publish their content to both Facebook and Twitter, providing moderation services for both will help Vitrue prevent its clients straying to other platforms. For busy brands strapped for community management resources, the Vitrue/Klout tool’s ability to distinguish common trolls from well-known critics could save them from PR crises. However, discontent can quickly snowball in the Twittersphere, so brands should still try to be as comprehensive as possible in dealing with public customer service complaints. I’ve followed Vitrue for a while now and it typically makes smart partnerships and acquisitions. Klout might be the best online reputation gauge, but it’s not totally dependable yet. Until Klout gets more accurate, Vitrue should consider replacing the exact scores in its Twitter tool with a colored threat-level system. Otherwise, it will need to work closely with clients to make sure they take Klout scores as general guides rather than gospel.  [Image Credit: Shutterstock] Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cloud storage service and device maker Pogoplug is unveiling its latest offering today: a new service for mobile users that offers 5 GB of free online storage. To use “Pogoplug Cloud,” you first sign up directly from your mobile phone or tablet (iOS or Android 2.2+), then download the app and begin the upload process. And that’s where Pogoplug really begins to shine: it automatically uploads the photos and videos from your device to the cloud – no sync required. In testing (on the iPhone), the process was pretty straightforward. You go to www.pogoplug.com from your mobile browser to sign up or login to the service and find the appropriate app for your device. You then launch the app, login and the upload just starts on its own. It really couldn’t be easier. In the app’s Settings, you can also specify whether the uploads can run over 3G, Wi-Fi or both, and there’s a curious setting where you get to specify a “destination” – what other destination besides Pogoplug Cloud could there be? There aren’t other options at present, but it would be great if this app could one day serve as a funnel to other cloud services too. Fingers crossed!  As a company, Pogoplug has been experimenting with different ways to entice users to its online cloud storage service, a challenge in the era of Google Docs and Amazon’s Cloud Drive and the like, all of which offer their own freemium services attached to much more recognizable brand names. Pogoplug typically uses its competitors’ size and scope to its advantage, though, at least in terms of its marketing. Pogoplug is about doing it yourself, hosting your own cloud storage safely and securely outside the reach of the big co’s. Today, there’s Pogoplug hardware, desktop applications, and now, this new mobile app, all of which attempt to funnel users into the Pogoplug Cloud instead. Although the Pogoplug user interface isn’t quite as clean and pretty as those from Google, Amazon, Box.net, Dropbox, iCloud or others, it’s certainly handy to get 5 GB of storage for free. But where Pogoplug stumbles is the pricing, something it claims is more affordable than the rest. That’s only the case when you “host-your-own,” though – then it’s free. Otherwise, additional online storage is $9.95/mo for 50 GB and $19.95/mo for 100 GB. Google, meanwhile, charges $5/year for 20 GB, $20/yr for 80 GB, $50/yr for 200 GB, $100/yr for 400 GB and $256/yr for 1 TB. Amazon charges $20/yr for 20 GB, $50/yr for 50 GB, $100/yr for 100 GB, $200/yr for 200 GB, $500/yr for 500 GB and $1000/yr for 1000 GB. And Apple’s iCloud is $20/yr for 10 GB, $40/yr for 20 GB and $100/yr for 50 GB. You see, it’s actually hard to compete with the big guys on the bottom line. If anything, Pogoplug is more in line with Dropbox, which also offers 50 GB for $50/mo or 100 GB for $19.99/month. That being said, if you’re looking for an additional backup destination for either iOS or Android (no single point of failure!), it doesn’t hurt to have another 5 GB to tap into somewhere. But when it comes time to switch over to the paid pricing tiers, Pogoplug may not make the cut. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Formspring is launching its first user Directory later today in an effort to better highlight the more popular and famous users of its online social Q&A service. The directory will organize users into categories like Music, Comedy, Sports & Fitness, Fashion & Beauty, Movies & TV, Tech & Start-ups and more. Current Formspring users will be able to locate the new feature through the “find more friends” section on Formspring when it goes live today, but you can see some of the celebrity users’ pages now, assuming you know their Formspring username. For example, there’s actor Taylor Lautner, producer Jerry Bruckheimer, the bands Incubus, We The Kings, and SOH!3, Marvel Creative Director Tom Brevoort, and pop star Camryn. At launch, the directory will feature over 100 popular users and more will be added in the weeks ahead. It will also be accessible directly via the URL formspring.me/favorites. The new feature is meant to compliment the previously launched “Formspring Interests” initiative, which allows users to add up to six interests to their profiles like Music, Sports, Fashion & Beauty, etc. Those “interests” are now mirrored by the categories found within the new Formspring Favorites directory. The bigger picture here is that Formspring isn’t just launching a directory, it’s taking yet another step on its way to becoming a full-fledged social network. You can see the way the company is carefully and thoughtfully building out links between its users, not only between these new interests and categories, but also through the profile page features “who made you smile” and “who you responded to.”  Formspring’s potential for disruption is that it’s not trying to build another Facebook (cough, Google+, cough), it’s trying to build a network around users’ interests. Of course, do to so, it still has to go up against Facebook’s own interest graph, based on the cumulation of millions of “likes. However, it has one slight advantage: when a Facebook brand page inserts its messaging into your social news feed, it can feel intrusive and annoying. Yet when you venture out to a destination site meant to connect you to brands, celebs, and media personalities, you both expect and desire the same sorts of interactions that may have felt “icky” or bothersome on Facebook. That could be a potential win for Formspring. Formspring now has 27 million users and sees more than 30 million unique visitors per month. With this new direct access to celeb accounts, it wouldn’t be surprising to see that traffic increase quite a bit in the near future. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social media marketing and analytics company Salorix has raised $3.5 million in Series A funding in a round co-led by Inventus Capital Partners and Nexus Venture Partners, the startup announced this morning. Salorix works directly with brands as well as agencies to help them manage ‘social media engagement’ campaigns, offering a platform that allows them to analyze social media and set up, coordinate, scale and track social marketing campaigns. Headquartered in Santa Clara (California) with offices in New York City and Bangalore (India), Salorix’s customers include United Online, HP/Palm and agencies like Mediacom and OMD. The company was founded in 2009 by veterans from digital media companies like AOL and Yahoo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Docphin is launching a new Web service the company likens to a “Bloomberg for Doctors.” The site aims to help physicians organize, bookmark, read and track medical news and research from a number of sources, all within a single dashboard interface. Included with the service are simple tools to view and filter through hundreds of medical journals, something which has been difficult to do using traditional research methods. The service even offers a built-in personalized Twitter widget for keeping up with medical societies, sources and other leaders in a doctor’s given speciality. One of the most important things to know about Docphin is not the sum of its features, but who’s behind it. This is a company built by doctors-slash-entrepreneurs who have direct knowledge of what their fellow physicians need. The service’s founders include Mitesh Patel, Derek Juang and Sachin Nanavati. In addition to being an entrepreneur, Patel is also a physician and clinical researcher, and has served as the business development consultant for more than ten healthcare startups. His research has been featured in the New England Journal of Medicine and The New York Times. Meanwhile, prior to Dochpin, Nanavati worked at IMS Consulting Group, which specialized in global strategies for pharmaceutical clients. He also has an MBA in Healthcare Management from Columbia Business School. Finally, Juang, like Patel, is an MD. He currently works as a staff physician at the Department of Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System and as an Assistant Professor of Clinical Medicine at the University of California in San Diego. Essentially, the concept for Docphin is that of a personalized news dashboard – something which numerous startups have built in the past, but mainly for consumers. Like any good news dashboard, Docphin is simple to set up and use. In less than five minutes, a new user can create their own page to aggregate information from medical journals, news media and Twitter feeds.  The site’s filters and tools let doctors sort and browse through the articles, share articles with their colleagues, start discussions by posting comments, bookmark articles for later reading and more. Docphin has been in testing for over a year, and has established partnerships with three academic medical centers: the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Michigan and the University of California-San Diego. The company plans to expand nationwide in 2012. Docphin is currently self-funded and looking for angel and VC funding.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily SalesVu, a new mobile payments application and SaaS solution designed for distributed sale teams, has closed $600,000 in angel funding, the company is announcing today. Like Square, SalesVu’s service includes a dongle that attaches to an iPhone or iPad, allowing its users to process mobile payments on the go using a mobile app. But unlike Square, the gadget doesn’t plug into the headphone jack – it uses the iPhone or iPad’s main port instead. The dongle also offers hardware encryption, something which Square’s competitors have criticized the company for not including. In addition, SalesVu takes Square head on in terms of pricing: it’s just 2.7% for all transactions (swiped or keyed in) compared with Square’s 2.75% (for swiped transactions only). To achieve these rates, the company does things a little differently than Square. For starters, it doesn’t hand out all its dongles for free. Each business customer gets the first dongle for free, but then has to pay $99 for each additional device.  Of course, a company could get around this requirement if they wanted to by signing up using a separate email address for each employee in need of a device. But doing so would preclude the business from taking advantage of SalesVu’s other key feature: the cloud-based infrastructure for centralized price management, reporting and marketing. Using SalesVu’s SaaS solution, businesses can monitor mobile transactions, watching for trends by product, time of day and employee, and then make adjustments to pricing and inventory data on the fly, based on those findings. All of this happens in real-time and is presented in an easy-to-read format complete with graphs, bar charts, tables and other reports. As the pricing changes, business owners can also share those discounts directly from SalesVu to Facebook, offering a coupon code that will work to activate the deal.  Because of its rich, real-time reporting capabilities, SalesVu is trying to solve a slightly different problem than Square or even Intuit’s GoPayment. That is, it’s not going after the small business or individual who could never before afford to take credit card payments – it’s going after businesses who rely on the performance of a highly mobile salesforce. The ideal customer is one whose potential bottom line can be impacted by access to real-time sales data and the ability to adjust product inventory quickly based on the analysis of that data. And as for that rate? The low 2.7%? According to SalesVu CEO Pascal Nicolas, the company had to negotiate quite a bit with its partner, Mercury Payment Systems, to get there. But Mercury sees mobile payments as a growth opportunity, so it was willing to take the risk. Austin-based SalesVu initially became available to the public on August 18th and now has around 1,000 customers worldwide. Its mobile applications for iPhone and iPad can work as standalone order processing/business management apps, but the credit card processing portion only works in the U.S. and Canada. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Diaspora sent out a new round of invites to a redesigned alpha version of its open source social network today. The invites came just before the saddening news broke that 22 year old founder Ilya Zhitomirskiy had recently passed away. Since it first administered invites a year ago, the service has launched hashtag following, direct messages, status update Like buttons, a notifications channel, and more. Diaspora has also added support for its first application, Cubbi.es, which lets users instantly post photos they find on the internet to the service via browser extensions. Though it has lost one of its forward thinking founders, the invites indicate that Diaspora will continue to pursue Zhitomirskiy’s goal to create a decentralized social network that “lets you be yourself and share however you want, with or without your real name.” Because Diaspora is decentralized, those with invites join one of the distinct pods of fellow users set up on independently hosted servers rather than a single hub that connects everyone. Users can opt to build an identity from scratch, or choose to connect their Facebook account to import their real name, profile pic, and allow cross-posting from Diaspora. Facebook’s presence in the onboarding process may surprise some who saw Diaspora as an attempt to depose Mark Zuckerberg’s highly centralized network. Instead, the optional Facebook integration shows the Diaspora team’s dedication to openness and a low-friction user experience. Once you’ve chosen some hashtags to follow, you’re brought to your new home screen which displays a stream of content from friends and those hashtags. A familiar publisher allows updates to be shared publicly, or with specific friend circles Diaspora calls “aspects” built on an asymmetrical follow system. Published updates can also be syndicated to connected Facebook, Twitter, and Tumblr accounts. In line with the site’s principles, its easy to download your photos or an .xml of your profile, as well as close your account. The site’s loading times are longer than on Facebook or Google+, but that’s to be expected of a startup social network. To really take off, Diaspora will need a better way for users to find and connect with Facebook friends and those they follow on Twitter. It does provide a suggested user list called “Community Spotlight”, though, which displays the profile pictures and followed hashtags of selected members to help new signups fill out their stream with relevant content. To demonstrate the potential of its application platform, Diaspora is promoting Cubbi.es in its sidebar. Once users authenticate with their Diaspora account and download a Chrome or Firefox extension, they can simply hold shift and click on any photo they come across on the web to share it publicly. Diaspora has now covered the bases to become a satisfactory solution for those uncomfortable with the compromises of control required for joining the leading social networks. Even if it doesn’t grow to hundreds of millions of users, Diaspora’s working alternative could influence the conversation about what a social network should be. This could inspire Facebook and Google+ to adopt some of Diaspora’s flexibility and expand the impact of Ilya’s ideals. [Thanks to Dave Miller for the tip]  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startups and entrepreneurs are far from lacking when it comes to resources that help guide them through the pain-staking yet always rewarding process of building a business. For example, they can check out the Startup Genome Project to see what specific components are integral to building a successful business, check out cool tools like this one to compare their term sheets to industry standards, or even these efforts by the Founder Institute to help founders standardize their relationships with advisors. Obviously, these are only a few of many — when it comes to connecting with funding, there are incubators, Angel List, Kickstarter — the list goes on. And then there’s entrepreneurial education by way of video series: Back in August, TechStars, the multi-city startup incubator, launched a “reality-documentary” TV series (in collaboration with Bloomberg) designed to give the world a peek at what it’s like to start a business in the fast-paced atmosphere of a tech incubator.  Riffing off video series like this one, Sprinkle Lab, a startup that makes commercial videos for tech companies, launched a series last week that aims to speak to anyone and everyone interested in the world of entrepreneurship. The series, called “Now I Know”, will be releasing a new episode every Monday and Wednesday for the next six weeks that contains a lesson learned, a memorable experience, or personal philosophy from different notable figures in the tech space. It’s slightly reminiscent of The Startup Kids, but instead of focusing on young entrepreneurs, it shares musings on the big issues the tech industry faces today, dished out by experts — of every age. The series premiered with six episodes featuring author of “The Lean Startup” Eric Ries, Craigslist Founder Craig Newmark, serial entrepreneur, lecturer, and author Steve Blank, Rock Health Founder Halle Tecco, Causes.com Co-founder and VP of Product Chris Chan and TechCrunch columnist and newly-minted CrunchFund VC MG Siegler. Now I Know’s most recent video, for example, features former TechCruncher and current Accel investment guru Dan Levine talking about  the concept of failure and how it might actually not be the best way to learn.  Sprinkle Lab Co-founder Cameron Woodward told us that he and his team founded Sprinkle Lab in March of this year, because they believed that there simply wasn’t enough good video coming out of the tech space. While there is Revision3 and other great video specialists like it, Woodward said that he wanted his startup to focus on making shows that are formatted for television, not just vlog-caliber.  “We’re millennials, so we don’t have that kind of patience”, he said. “We wanted to see something short and sweet and dripping with nerdy goodness”, so having founded a video firm built with MediaCore (a startup focused on letting SMBs build their own video platforms, which we profiled in August) — Sprinkle Lab launched Now I Know based on their desire to see this kind of educational content find a home. There will be more videos launching next week, and while these videos are great, they leave you wanting more. Hopefully Sprinkle Lab will release the full interviews in the future; I have a feeling they would find an audience. Below is an example of Now I Know’s content, featuring Steve Blank talking about the fundamental differences between small businesses and startups. Check it out:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInLivestream’s Max Haot on Entry Into the U.S.Have a great idea, investors lined-up and a passion for technology? If you live outside America’s borders, and weren’t born inside them, chance are slim you’ll be launching your company in New York, Silicon Valley or any other high-tech United States city unless you have deep pockets and the right paperwork. Speaking from first hand experience, Livestream co-founder Max Haot discusses what it takes non-native Americans to pierce though the U.S. border as entrepreneurs in his final Founder Stories interview with Chris Dixon. After ruling out marrying an American, winning the Green Card lottery or being awarded a Visa for possessing extraordinary talents – basically what’s left is receiving an investor E2 visa – which Haot was handed partially as result of possessing deep pockets following a couple-hundred-thousand-dollar exit. Those of modest means need not apply. Dixon’s not a fan of the legal maze and weighs in by saying, “You could have a top VC, Sequoia or something say I want to fund this person, this person wants to come here, create a company that creates lots of jobs for Americans and the current rules prohibit it unless they happen to be rich.” As the two continue their conversation below, Hoat reflects on key decisions he’s made. He rates swapping out the name Mogulus with Livestream as one of the most strategic – and humbling. After convincing co-founders, customers and investors that Mogulus was the strongest name for the company “you put your hand up one day and say [naming the company Mogulus] was the worst decision ever.” A bitter pill to swallow at the time, it turned out to be the right call. Haot says the change helped reposition the company and adds, “I don’t think we’d be around with the current revenue growth, which we need to stay around, if we were called Mogulus.” He ends by telling Dixon as an entrepreneur “you have to be able to say actually I was wrong, and do it in a very public way.” Make sure to watch episodes I and II of Dixon’s interview with Max Haot, along which past Founder Stories interviews which feature conversations with leaders including Mike McCue, Eric Reis, Seth Sternberg, and Kevin Systrom. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When it comes to music and drinking, these activities are best enjoyed in the company of others — hopefully friends. But, when combining music and libations, it’s not always easy to know just what kind of drink should be sipped while listening to your favorite Barry White tunes. Courvoisier? Personally, I prefer a Fresca for music of every single stripe, but people want choice, and they want to match the best of both music and spirits. Last weekend, The Echo Nest, the music intelligence company that connects app developers to music and music data, organized a “hackday” in Boston for developers, coders, and hacking supastars looking to bring their skills to bear upon the current array of problems besetting the music industry to start creating apps, products, and more to solve those problems. The weekend produced a number of cool hacks, but I thought one in particular was worth sharing to get this weekend (or any weekend for that matter) off on the right foot. Drinkify is a new website that, simply put, tells you what to drink while you’re listening to certain types of music. Enter “Justin Bieber”, and Drinkify tells you what kind of libation is best enjoyed while listening to the Biebs’s greatest hit. In this case, it’s 8 ounces of Red Bull. I would have said a “Shirley Temple”, but what do I know? It’s fairly straightforward. According to the developers, Matthew Ogle, Hannah Donovan, and Lindsay Eyink, the best hacks should be about something one loves — they should scratch an itch and solve one of our myriad personal problems. Maybe it was a result of a hangover, maybe not, but drinks were on their minds. They wanted some hair-of-the-dog style recommendations, and so Drinkify (formerly “Boozi.ly”) was born. As for the technical side, the Drinkify creators used the Echo Nest’s API for lists of terms and genres that describe artists and audio summaries of top tracks (whether the songs are slow or fast, etc.), the Last.fm API for artist and album images, name spelling, most-played tracks for individual artists, and, of course, the proprietary Drinkify database, because, as the Drinkifiers say, “booze still doesn’t have an API”. And it’s a damn shame. Obviously, this was a hack created over a very short period of time, so it’s far from perfect. Many of the drinks paired with artists are seriously lacking in creativity, and some just flat out don’t make sense. But there are some that do, like Slayer, Edith Piaf, and Bob Dylan. Black Sabbath is pretty hilarious, too. I like the “garnish with olive” — that really topped it off nicely. In terms of the recommendations, “stirring speed” is tied to the average beats per minute (i.e. tempo) of the artist’s top song. This is a somewhat clever quick-fix, but obviously for many artists, their top song may not always be indicative of their entire catalog. The Drinkify founders said that they’ve had bands and artists reaching out to them on Twitter to tell them what their favorite drinks are, and in some cases, they’ve been changing them to reflect that where it made sense to associate them with their tipples of choice. Hey, maybe Drinkify could even charge these artists to do just that. Or simply paste the entire site in booze-related display ads, though I hope to God that’s not the case.  Even in spite of some imperfections, Drinkify racked up over 5 million page views in only three days. Clearly, it has a few addictive ingredients — and if it refines itself from Carlo Rossi into a fine California merlot, maybe it’s got a shot at the big time.  Let us know what you think, and try not to throw all your rotten vegetables at once.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily With great power comes great responsibility, and in few places is that more true than the healthtech industry. Practice Fusion is the leading provider of electronic medical records, now helping 130,000 doctors to track records for 25 million patients, CEO Ryan Howard told me today. That’s over 3x the EMRs hosted by Kaiser Permanente or the VA. Practice Fusion is free for doctors and patients. It monetizes through a marketplace for labs, pharmacies, and drug companies who pay for preferred placement in front of doctors who direct a staggering $40 billion in spend a year through the platform. Its new iPad app, debuted today at Practice Fusion’s annual conference, will let these doctors access records while out of the office. In addition to saving lives, the average doctor in California directs about $2.3 million a year in spend. Just imagine how much decision and recommendation power doctors have: “take this pill not that one”, “pick it up from this pharmacy”, “your test is being analyzed by this lab”. By next year, Howard tells me that figure will have grown well past the $60 billion a year spent through eBay. These medical service providers buy expensive banner ads in the Practice Fusion platform to ensure doctors choose them, and it’s making the company a lot of money. Practice Fusion’s doctor and record uptake rate is growing exponentially. It counted 70,000 clients in April when it raised a $23 million series B, and by September when it took $6 million more in funding it had 100,000 health care providers on board. Now Practice Fusion is at 130,000, and with each new doctor comes roughly 2,000 new patients who can access their own medical records from anywhere. Doctors can begin using the product in minutes, and can pay to have all their existing paper records scanned in over a few days. Practice Fusion’s competitors can take 6 months or longer to get doctors set up. Howard tells me “We’re effectively the Salesforce for doctors, and the Facebook for health.” He explains that through its APIs, Practice Fusion will become the hub for personal medical data from consumer devices and services such as FitBit and wireless weight scales. This includes 100Plus, the personalized health prediction platform Howard co-founded with funding from Peter Thiel and Founders Fund to let people see how healthy decisions can expand their lifespan. That hub could become another lucrative medical advertising magnet. More altruistically, Practice Fusion is working with Palantir and the CDC to power disease outbreak detection with its data. At its core, though, Practice Fusion’s goal is to make medical record access instant and efficient. That’s why it debuted an iPad app for doctors on the go, designed by Cooper, the firm headed by Alan Cooper, the father of Visual Basic. It securely provides access to records so if a doctor gets an after-hours call about a patient, they have all their necessary medical data at hand so they can make informed decisions. Prioritizing usability, doctors can see their day’s appointments and instantly dive into each patient’s chief complaint, allergies, problems, medications, family history, hospitalizations, and more. Doctors can record patient dictations of their symptoms, and combine their own assessment and treatment plan with pre-defined treatment plans for common ailments to minimize typing. They can also view lists of tasks, and receive push notifications of updates from their office. Practice Fusion’s team is changing healthcare, and Howard says doctors love them for it. With strong growth, client loyalty, expanding revenue streams, and an ambitious vision, Practice Fusion is on its way to making us all healthier, and its investors richer.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily KinderTown is a newly launched app store for parents which offers a curated collection of kid-friendly applications. What makes the store unique is that it only includes apps which have been deemed to have “substantial educational value” for kids three to six years old. In order to evaluate the apps’ quality, each app is first reviewed by early childhood educators, then tested by parents and kids before admission. At launch, KinderTown’s app store is available as a universal app that works on the iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch. When you launch KinderTown, you can filter the app selections by platform (iPhone, iPad or Universal), recommended ages, subject matter (e.g., math, language, art, science, etc.) and price (free or paid).  Apps that match your search filters appear on screen, and you can tap on them to see descriptions, screenshots and pricing information. A tap on the “get the app” button will then pop you over to the iTunes App Store to start the download. The KinderTown staff includes two former teachers responsible for the app reviews. Kay Welch specializes in early childhood education and has more than 20 years of experience teaching and writing curriculums for school districts. Carolina Nugent spent five years as a kindergarten teacher and received recognition for her integration of technology and apps in the classroom. The concept for the KinderTown itself comes from serial entrepreneur and DreamIt Ventures co-founder Steve Welch. Steve previously founded Mitos, a global company in the biotech-manufacturing field, which was later sold to a Fortune 500 company. He says that the idea for KinderTown emerged from his own frustration in finding good educational apps for his own 4-year old daughter. As a geek parent myself, I know that feeling. Although my child is only now pushing two, she’s already madly addicted to the iPhone and iPad, shouting “monkey!” (thank you, Monkey Preschool Lunchbox) every time she sees either device. In a home filled with many beloved gadgets, it’s only a matter of time before she’s completely sucked into the iOS gaming world. But with an App Store that now boasts over half a million applications, it’s beyond challenging to find appropriate, functional, and hopefully not entirely brain-rotting apps these days. Although Apple could one day upgrade its own “Genius” offering to allow for more granular filtering and searching, that day hasn’t yet arrived, allowing KinderTown to step in and serve this need. For now, the app will support itself through the App Store affiliate program, but it may offer premium subscriptions for additional learning products in the future. Self-funded KinderTown is now available as a free download here on iTunes. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Shervin Pishevar and Matt Galligan have just formally announced the beta launch of their new organization 1% of Nothing. It’s aimed at inspiring early-stage companies to donate 1% of their equity to a cause of their choice. The idea is that startups pledge 1% when that equity may be worth nothing, but if they’re acquired, that 1% becomes a significant donation. Starting today, whole companies and individual employees alike can make the pledge to donate 1% of their equity. Serial entrepreneur, VC, and TechCrunch contributor Pishevar met Galligan, cofounder and former CEO of SimpleGeo, after Galligan accidentally attended a philanthropy panel during Summit at Sea. They saw initiatives pushing individual micro-donations and corporate philanthropy, but wanted to encourage giving from the startups in between. When asked what’s broken with startup philanthropy at present, Galligan told me, “It’s mostly nonexistent. There’s no way of knowing whether they’re doing it unless they post about their donation on a website.” The hope is that by shining a light on who’s contributing, it will become the norm and more entrepreneurs will join the movement. He doesn’t see his organization as a competitor but more as a complement to Entrepreneur’s Foundation and others with similar goals. Galligan had already seen the potential of the 1% model. He pledged 1% of the equity of his first company SocialThing. When it got acquired by AOL, that pledge became the year’s biggest single donation to the Community Foundation of Boulder, helping it to successfully push a proposition to fund local at-risk schools. Now Galligan and Pishevar are hoping more companies and employees will follow suit. In addition to equity, they can pledge to donate 1% of their time or profits. Along with the warm, fuzzy feeling of making the world a better place, the site explains that “the entrepreneur that donates their 1% actually gets a tax write-off benefit, sweetening the deal even more.” If entrepreneurs aren’t sure what to donate to, the organization will help them identify efficient causes making a big impact. The 1% of Nothing team is now dedicated to driving awareness and understanding of early-stage corporate philanthropy and showing off who’s participating. The first startups are already jumping on board: I just made a difference by taking the #1PercentPledge, donating 1% of my equity in @COLOURlovers to a philanthropic effort via @1PercentOf. — Bubs 'Darius Monsef' (@bubs) November 10, 2011  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last year, Tim Heineke of Twones and Tone.fm, Marcel Corso and Diedrik Martens launched a new Amsterdam-based music startup, called Shuffler.fm, to let users listen to the tunes and artists being covered by music blogs while they read. The startup thus began its career as a cool web app for music discovery, with the goal of aggregating music from blogs across the Internets — based on genre. Over the last year, Shuffler.fm has evolved into a service that now allows users to play continuous mixes of their favorite music blogs, browse through popular songs and artists through a nifty search function, as well as create personalized channels based on “favorite-ing” tracks and blogs. Music blogs can also create their own pages, including a “Play this blog” button that launches the blog’s own channel. (Check out Sarah’s coverage in August here.) With its initial functionality, Shuffler.fm was really a hybrid of Pandora and ex.fm for music blogs-curated tunes. Yet, on Tuesday, the startup expanded that influence to include Flipboard, launching an iPad app that transforms music blogs and websites into radio stations, curating them in a Flipboard-style layout of words, pictures, and streaming audio.  The Shuffler.fm iPad essentially app creates an aggregated music magazine that serves content from a diverse set of music bloggers and experts in realtime (content is updated by the minute), providing a ready-to-consume filtered stream of music optimized for discoverability and at the same time presenting a curated experience so that users don’t have to deal with parsing the ridiculous amount of noise being dished out by music content producers. In other words, it’s music listening with an editorial filter. Of course, rather than basing the content it serves on your existing tastes, like so many other music services out there (Last.fm, Pandora), Shuffler’s audio is brought to you in genre-based channels that are populated by (only the coolest) blogs, like Pitchfork, TheMusic.FM, and Stereogum to name a few. Users can create playlists of songs from these visual RSS blog feeds at the bottom of the app, where they can then listen via the app’s player, all while reading about the songs they’re listening to. The app also supports AirPlay so that users aren’t just confined to listening to music from their iPad’s speakers. For those who’ve already been using Shuffler’s web app, the experience of using the iPad app will be familiar. The two experiences are comparable, with perhaps even a bit more simplicity in terms of design and UX in the new iPad app. The experience is also, of course, very reminiscent of that of Flipboard, in that content is displayed in a visually attractive, tile-based layout that does a great job of balancing visual candy without distracting from the music and discoverability features. Listening to a blog-powered radio stream while being able to view relevant video content or swipe through to the band or blog’s homepage is at once a familiar experience that may not sound particularly earth-shaking, but it’s done in such a way that it still feels new. It’s a great human curated alternative to the slew of machine algorithms that are today powering many of our favorite music apps. And it also helps that the app has built-in bookmarking and sharing features that let you come back to your favorite tracks or blog posts while sharing the music you discover with friends. To help it in its mission to become the new Pandora/Flipboard of the iPad, Founder Tim Heineke told us that the startup has just closed a $700K round of angel funding. While Heineke was not yet able to share the names of the investors, he did say that Shuffler.fm has gained nearly 500K users to date. Will update as we learn more. Check out Shuffler.fm on the App Store here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily The initial run of of Nest’s artificial intelligence thermostats will be shipped out to pre-orderers tomorrow, said Nest founder and CEO Tony Fadell at GigaOm’s RoadMap conference today. Previously the company had said the devices wouldn’t ship until the end of November. Users are so desperate for the home heating revolution that the devices have sold out and are back ordered. Those who’ve since reserved their units may not receive them until February 2012. Fadell says Nest has ceased taking orders until it can catch up. At the conference, Fadell spoke of several of the innovations in the company’s device. It will analyze the thermal decay of a house to determine how long it takes for heat to dissipate. This helps prevent it from continuing to expend energy if the warmth of daylight will return before the house cools down. An “Auto-Away” feature uses far-field motion detection to assess whether no one is in the house for a few days, perhaps because you’ve gone on vacation. If so, the unit goes into low-energy mode. The Nest thermostat also tracks your manual heating adjustments. For example, it can learn that you turn off the heat when you leave for work in the morning and turn it back on when you return in the evening, and then start to automatically make these changes for you. Fadell explained that “Absolutely I’d call it AI”, and these he’s proud to count a world expert on machine learning from Carnegie Mellon as a team member. When asked what about the Nest development process made him cry, Fadell lamented that they spent so much time designing their unit but that the problems start with”the thing this attaches to. There’s 40 to 50 years of heating ‘technology'” with a with a wild variety of different wire and voltage standards that Nest has to try to be compatible with. Tomorrow, Nest can expect the start of an influx of customer service inquiries from buyers trying to connect their next generation thermostats. [Image Credit: Shutterstock] Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google has agreed to support the folks behind Startup Weekend to jumpstart and foster startup communities from around the world.  Through a global sponsorship, the search and online advertising juggernaut will enable the expansion of Startup Weekend’s current operations, but there’s a bit more to the story than just that. The alliance will also facilitate the worldwide rollout of pre-Startup Weekend Google developer workshops and – allow me to quote from the briefing I got – ‘vertical specific initiatives in areas such as education and health’. Update: here’s Google’s blog post about the partnership: “Started in early 2008, there are now more than 280 GTUGs in 86 countries that bring tech enthusiasts together via hundreds of events each month.  GTUG members will receive discounted registration for Startup Weekend events and will help run pre-weekend local bootcamps on Google’s developer platforms and tools (e.g., App Engine, Android, Chrome).” Startup Weekend’s Joey Pomerenke tells me the partnership involves financial sponsorship of the organization, which recently became an affiliate of the Kauffman Foundation. He declined to specify exactly how much we’re talking here, but did say it concerns a ‘significant amount of capital’. Earlier this week, we reported that Startup Weekend EDU also received a $250,000 grant from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. From the press briefing we received: The initial partnership rollout will begin in cities with active Google developer communities in the form of Google Technology User Groups (GTUGs) and existing Startup Weekend communities. The pre-Startup Weekend GTUG workshops will help develop the technical skills of ambitious entrepreneurs so that they may quickly and successfully implement those skills just days later on real startup projects at Startup Weekend events.  Workshops are already scheduled in Boston, Detroit, Los Angeles, Seattle, New York City, San Francisco, and Dallas, and internationally in London, Buenos Aires, and Sao Paulo, with more cities being added soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s hard when you’re new to a city and have no friends. When I visit a new city I tend to hide in trees and behind garbage bins and watch people from afar, seeing where they go to eat and socialize. Then I go to those places at night, when they’re closed, and sniff the air for their scent. However, Drumo offers an improved method for finding out specific things about a city using Quora-style discussion connected to geodata of major metropolitan areas. As it stands, the service is limited to Sydney, Singapore, and Tokyo, thus limiting your choices. However, it is still in beta and looks to be an interesting way to figure things out on the ground. For example, you can ask about sushi restaurants and the best watch shops and get real answers from real people. You’re rewarded with points and badges for correct answers and there are tie-ins with local businesses. The questions range from the mundane to the fairly urgent and it seems sparsely populated right now by friends of the devs. However, the design is whimsical and cute and the service, on the surface, seems useful. Australia’s Design Royale built and funded the app and there is no current public investment. They’re growing the service slowly but surely and they should be adding new cities, including Osaka and Hong Kong, over the next few months. There is an iPhone app available now and an Android app forthcoming. Now I can satisfy my sinister urges with the help of hundreds of willing volunteers and, given the Quora-like interface, I can now find locations with outdoor seating to sniff. That, my friends, is what the Internet was made for.This slideshow requires JavaScript. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s not often that an iPhone user gets jealous of an Android application, but that’s definitely the case here with Any.DO, the gorgeous new social To Do list app for Android launching today. The app comes from the team behind Taskos, one of the most popular To Do list applications on the Android Market. More notably, Any.DO is backed by $1 million in angel funding from Eric Schmidt’s Innovation Endeavors, Blumberg Capital, Genesis Partners, Palantir (Joe Lonsdale), Felicis Ventures (Aydin Senkut) and Brian Koo and includes Erick Tseng, head of mobile products at Facebook, and Elad Gil, Director of Corporate Strategy at Twitter, as advisors. Any.DO was founded in 2010 by Omer Perchik, Yoni Lindenfeld and Itay Kahana and now has offices in both Palo Alto, California and Tel Aviv, Israel. The interesting thing about this team’s first app, Taskos, was that it was meant to serve as market research only. The founders were surprised how popular it became – something that may serve as a reminder about the need for quality apps on the Android platform. Taskos now has 1.3 million users and handles 150,000+ tasks per day. Those users will now be invited to try Any.DO instead, Perchik says. When you launch Any.DO, the first thing you’ll notice is its attractive design. After having been on Android myself for over a year, I can say with confidence that this is still somewhat a rarity for the platform. (Go ahead, flame away). But Any.DO looks great, offering a default white theme and a more “Android-y” black theme. Like any to do list, Any.DO supports the basics, like adding tasks, marking them complete, setting priorities, etc. But it does a number of other things which make it stand out from the crowd. For example, you can create tasks using voice input, it syncs with Google tasks, and you can use gestures to manage your tasks like drag-and-drop for assigning task priorities or organizing tasks into folders or swiping to mark tasks complete. You can also shake your phone to clear off the completed tasks from the screen. However, the most important feature is the app’s backend. This task list app is actually intelligent, offering to auto-complete entries as you type. The suggestions of common words and phrases are gathered through the analysis of aggregate, anonymized data from the app’s users. For example, start typing “ca…” and the app may suggest “call mom,” “call dad,” “car wash,” etc. It’s like Google’s auto-complete for tasks. Any.DO also lets you collaborate on tasks with family, friends and colleagues, potentially displacing group texting, email threads and other more socially focused apps like Facebook or GroupMe. It can offer contact suggestions when building collaborative tasks, and for those who are not Any.DO members, the app supports communication via email and SMS. A future version will send non-users’ replies back into the app, too, similar to how GroupMe works today. As far as the bigger pictures goes, Any.DO is working towards building out a smarter, more intelligent system that can help you actually get things done, not just list the things you need to do. Details on how exactly that will work are sparse, but a comparison to Siri’s capabilities was hinted at in our conversation with co-founder Perchik. And no, fellow iPhone users, Any.DO isn’t going to be an Android-only app for long. The iPhone version is just a few months out. In the meantime, Android users, congrats, you can grab the new app from here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInLivestream’s Max Haot on FundingsIn part II of Chris Dixon’s Founder Stories interview with Livestream co-founder Max Haot, Hoat offers his analysis of what he encountered while attempting to secure funding between roughly 2007 and early 2008. At the time, Haot feels VC’s were hovering over technology that allowed people to digitally record events and watch the action on their own time. However, as presidential candidates crisscrossed the country during the ’08 election, Livestream caught a break thanks to an invite from Gannett who started using Livestream (then known as Mogulus) to broadcast the activity. Pleased with the results, Haot says Gannett invested $10-million and delivered a bundle of cash that arrived just in time. Livestream pocketed the money shortly before the financial sector imploded, and after it did, the team seemed to sharpen its focus. He tells Dixon, we needed “to operate under the assumption that we will never get anymore cash and we started monetizing and deploying our premium business, understanding our customers more and rebranding to Livestream.” Haot adds renaming Mogulus to Livestream was “one of the single best decisions” the company has ever made. As Livestream looks ahead, Hoat is broadening Livestream’s offerings by blending various forms of media (text, photos, pre-produced video clips and live video) into a scrolling event pages in order to “extend the event online.” He says Livestream is not just “live video” but “a stream in realtime” Make sure to hear his full thoughts by watching both videos, and check out episode I of this interview here. Past episodes of Founder Stories with leaders from Gilt Groupe, BirchBox, Eventbrite, and Flipboard are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’re lucky here in the old U.S. of A. App stores are pretty much monolithic and aside from a few odd stragglers, there’s really only one place to find apps for each of the platforms. However, what if your country does’t support a certain app store or what if you want to send your friends to a certain app, knowing that they each have different phones? That’s where Appitalism comes in. Created by Simon Buckingham, the founder of ringtones.com, Appitalism is a one-stop shop for apps. The system allows you to buy apps for every major platform in one place. For example, you can buy Angry Birds for almost any phone, including Symbian, WebOS, and Android. The system seamlessly submits your order to the official app store in question and, when applicable, supplies a file for side-loading.  The service also offers discounts for new users, including 50 cents just for signing up and a few dollars for connecting your Facebook and Twitter streams, effectively allowing you to grab a few free apps just for logging in. While this may seem fairly useless in a sophisticated market, it is definitely helpful for developers and marketers. For example, the service offers a link shortener that takes you to a single page for your app, allowing users to pick up the ported app of their choice while reducing the number of links they have to scroll through to find the right app. Appitalism is also the default app store for many countries and their Wings program allows developers to select where their apps will appear, including in the stores of carriers around the world. In countries like China where there are 70 or so different app stores, this definitely helps reduce clutter. The service is now available in over 50 countries and it works with almost any phone. There is also a Facebook “app” that recreates much of the regular site’s functionality but allows you to share favorite apps with your friends. The company is a subsidiary of Mobile Streams, a digital content retailer.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Amateur bloggers want exposure, while publishers and brands want cheap content they can monetize. Tidal launches today with hopes of connecting the two. Bloggers signup, and Tidal’s licensable content curation platform pulls out the best posts that match what its clients are looking for. These posts are delivered to the editors of apps and sites like Zagat’s Fork and Tell, Condé Nast’s Teen Vogue, and Bob Vila Nation, who have the final say of what to publish. The sites are willing to pay Tidal because the crowdsourced content draws traffic but is cheaper than paying writers or hiring an editor to go find content. If you’re a blogger and want to be fast tracked through the approval process, sign up at http://tid.al/ using the code “techcrunch” without the quotes. A beta trial to create a community fashion channel for Condé Nast’s Teen Vogue was a success, with 2,000 blogger applicants and thousands of crowdsourced posts live on the site. Tidal has now signed up over 5,400 bloggers thanks to buttons asking for contributors on the sites it powers. Contributors don’t receive monetary compensation, but get exposure and links back to their original posts. In this way, Tidal leverages the vast numbers of bloggers who are just trying to express their passion. To sift through applicants and the posts of those accepted, Tidal’s curation engine scores posts based on how well they’d fit the on the sites of their clients. It looks for proper post length, number of photos, keyword density, comment volume, author’s Klout score, similarity to previous popular posts, and the grade level the writing is suited for. It also screens for spam and giveaways. Posts that qualify are delivered with a confidence rating for how likely they are to fit the host. This curation is what Tidal sees as its value-add. Editors can then scan through the refined list of submissions through Tidal’s dashboard and pick what they want to have appear on their site. Founder Matt Myers tells me he sees Tidal as a better solution than content farms like Demand Media and Contently because it’s opt in rather than scraping the entire web. The platform can be optimized for sites with different success metrics. For example, it can deliver traffic-drawing posts for publishers, content that encourages purchases for ecommerce sites, and articles that inspire Facebook Likes for brands. Tidal is part of the fourth fourth class of new accelerator First Growth. Its advisors have helped the 5-person startup form connections in the New York scene and groom itself for a coming large seed or small venture funding round. Myers tells me, “I don’t think we could have built this company in San Francisco, because publishers and agencies are super important to us and you sort of have to be here to run into those people.” Similar to Techmeme, Tidal employs a two-tier, algorithm-plus-editors curation model that is efficient yet accurate. It gives bloggers the recognition that can inspire them to keep writing, and gives big websites a sense of community.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily At the beginning of the year, Josh Buckley and Tyler Diaz were busy building their new Pokemon-inspired social game, MinoMonsters, among Y Combinator’s spring class of startups. At 18 and 17 years of age, respectively, Buckley and Diaz were the youngest pair of founders the accelerator had ever accepted into the fold, YC Founder and Partner Paul Graham said at the time. And today, Buckley can add another accolade to the list, as he is now the youngest CEO that Andreessen Horowitz has invested in to date.  Yep. The MinoMonsters team today announced that it has raised a total of $1 million in seed funding over the course of 2011 from an impressive group of investors, which includes the likes of Andreessen Horowitz, SV Angel, Y Combinator, Yuri Milner, General Catalyst, Ignition Partners, Raymond Tonsing, and Reddit Co-founder Alexis Ohanian. Backed by this infusion of new capital, MinoMonsters has opened offices in downtown San Francisco, has expanded its team to eleven, and will finish off the development of its eponymous, flagship social title, MinoMonsters, which is set to make its iOS debut on the App Store on December 6th. (Android and Windows versions are on their way.) When we first profiled MinoMonsters in March, Buckley (now 19) told us that the startup had just hired one of the youngest engineers from “one of the biggest companies in the industry”.  Well, today, MinoMonsters is officially revealing that it has added 25-year-old TJ Murphy as a co-founder and chief of tech. Murphy is a former product manager at Zynga and is the co-founder of the Social Gaming Network (SGN), where he helped create Warbook, one of the early social games to use Facebook as its core platform. (SGN was later acquired by Myspace.) The founders said that Murphy will lead MinoMonsters development as well as the company’s technology strategy — and original founder Tyler Diaz has opted to be cool, and finish high school.  Back in March, MinoMonsters soft launched with a web client, and following Zynga’s lead, took to Facebook. But the meteoric growth of mobile games and mobile technology has been impossible to ignore, so the founders decided to pivot, removed the game from Facebook, and got busy transforming MinoMonsters into an exclusively-mobile title. The core of the game remains, however, as the $1 iOS app will introduce players to a series of crazy creatures, which they must capture and train to use in a series of one-on-one battles in an effort to protect the peace of the “legendary Kingdom of Zancardi”. As the story goes, a thousand years in the past, some tremendous cataclysm shook the kindgom and created the so-called MinoMonsters and imbued them with special powers, leaving them to fend for themselves on a series of islands. But, as is so often the case, evil is descending on the land, and gamers must train these monsters to harness their powers and defeat, well, my guess is: The encroaching forces of evil.  Basically, to succeed in the series of battles that makes up the gameplay of MinoMonsters, gamers have to learn how to train and control these monsters, which each have their own distinct personality. The goal is to gain control over the monsters’ special powers (be it fire, water, earth, etc.), and as players become more adept at managing their beasts, the further they advance in the game.  The game offers both single player and multiplayer mode, but the latter is obviously where the team is focused, as they want MinoMonsters to be one of the first iOS titles that nearly forces gamers to play with their friends.  Not only that, but the founders told me that they have their eyes set on building not just a mobile games development company, or a social games enterprise, they want to build MinoMonsters into a mega brand in the line of Angry Birds. So, for now, the focus is not on adding further titles to a suite of games, (though that’s still in the cards) it’s on pushing out an engaging, socially-enabled game that could lead to stuffed animals, animated cartoons, etc. down the road. It really is straight out of the Rovio/Angry Birds playbook. And, with these millenials having watched Pokemon focus its brand on the development of console games, they think they have a leg up on Nintendo’s uber franchise by focusing their attention on mobile, an area where Pokemon games really haven’t taken off. Of course, in the end, funding from big-name investors and having an intimate familiarity with Zynga’s strategy is only half the battle. The key is to offer engaging gameplay, an original narrative, and avoid repetitive characters, levels, and controls. Based on an early look, the animation seems to pop, and it’s a blast learning to control the special powers of your pet monsters. The question is whether this will have broad appeal to young and older audiences alike and if multiplayer mobile gameplay is ready to carry monster battles to widespread adoption and past the tipping point. That remains to be seen, but so far, so good. Definitely worth checking out when MinoMonsters claw onto the App Store. Chime in to let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Eric Alterman is a quintessential serial tech entrepreneur. He’s founded a fairly diverse set of software, telecom, and semiconductor companies that include Kickapps, which was acquired by Kit digital in 2010, MeshNetworks, which was acquired by Motorola in 2005, Triton Network Systems (which IPO-ed in 2000), TeraNex, SkyCross, and more. In 1997, he co-founded an accelerator that funded and grew companies based on tech licensed from military contractors, like Lockheed, ITT and Raytheon. In 2004, Alterman founded a video sharing platform that he says was essentially YouTube before YouTube. Though the startup didn’t quite have the legs to achieve scale, the entrepreneur said that the company’s “failure” (coupled with YouTube’s emergence) gave him a valuable insight into how (and how not) to build a SaaS platform that can serve thousands of customers, scale, and become a turnkey solution for an entire space.  With big data all the rage these days, last year, he turned his sights to the next big thing: App data and data interoperability, with the goal of allowing developers to share and exchange the massive amounts of data created daily by the world’s growing collection of web and mobile apps. Today, Alterman and co-founder Tom Luczak are announcing officially announcing their new venture, Flow Corporation, and the beta release of its eponymous Flow platform — a realtime data platform-as-a-service (PaaS) and content curation platform. The technology is, on the one hand, a data exchange for app developers, and on the other hand, an off-the-shelf dashboard for consumers and enterprises that allows them to create and curate information streams on any subject — like a suped-up RSS reader. In other words, the Flow platform enables developers to take advantage of a ready-to-use backend for app data (including stream processing and aggregation) in the hopes of increasing efficiency and lowering the cost of implementing realtime data systems for their apps. Using the Flow platform, developers can connect and share data from web, mobile, and enterprise apps with other developers on a permissioned, realtime basis. For example: A restaurant-focused mobile app may show people looking for good places to eat the best options nearby, but with Flow, the developers of that restaurant would be able to draw from (and present) complementary data from other apps on nearby stores, coupon deals, or local events. By building infrastructure that allows apps to intercommunicate and serve users with a host of contextual information, Alterman is hoping that Flow can begin to break up walled data silos and change the way developers make use of and serve realtime data.  Connecting apps through social functionality was a significant first step for the future of data, the founder says, but connecting apps on a more fundamental and robust level is the next step. On the flip side, for consumers and enterprise customers, iFlow.com is the other piece of the puzzle, offering everyday web users the ability to discover, create, curate, and share realtime information on any subject — in a filtered and contextual way. Like next-gen RSS. (Example image of iFlow’s consumer UI below.)  iFlow allows users to follow ideas instead of individuals, in contrast to Twitter and Facebook, for example, taking the next step beyond the kind of realtime info streams we see on social networks, to apply that to rich data from any and all sources. The consumer platform is built using Flow’s APIs and really functions as an example of the kind of realtime stream processing functionality developers can take advantage of when building their web and mobile apps.  As to what’s next, Alterman says that he wants to offer developers (and consumers) the opportunity to buy and sell subscriptions for realtime data through a flow marketplace, which would give content owners the ability to control business rules and monetize data streams — from product reviews to proprietary research. The startup has also recently closed a two-part $3 million round of seed funding from Cloud Capital Partners, BH Ventures, Blantyre Partners, Kappa East, Redstonne LLC, and Venetia Kontogouris of Trident Capital, which the startup will use to continue rolling out new features and developing its data marketplace. For TechCrunch readers interested in getting an early look at the data platform in action, Flow is offering invites to its beta to the first 50 readers that send an email to “EarlyAccess@flow.net” with “TechCrunch invite” in the subject line.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily With an enormous professional social network consisting of over 100 million users, LinkedIn is undoubtedly a great business — and a valuable service. Of course, the problem with LinkedIn and other professional networking and job platforms is that there’s a lack of real conversation between individuals and businesses. Hands down, businesses are looking to hire great talent, but they want more robust ways to find the most relative candidates for their open positions and job seekers want better tools to find the top ranked companies that are relevant to their backgrounds, what those companies are looking for in candidates — and they want feedback. In September, two Stanford Business School, grads Brendan Wallace and Adeyemi Ajao, launched the beta  build of Identified, a professional job search engine built on Facebook data that looks to take on LinkedIn and BranchOut (among others) in an effort to give job seekers and companies a better way to connect and find talent. The main feature of Identified is its so-called “Identified Score”, which assign a numerical rank (out of 100) to professionals based on their work history, education history and social network.  Wallace and Ajao call these rankings “Google Page Rank for people”; just as the search giant ranks websites based on their relevance to certain search terms, Identified uses its scores to do just that with professionals. The ranking is a proxy for relevance, so based on a user’s most up-to-date background information, they will show up in searches for categories that are relevant to their most recent jobs, etc. Working with metadata from Facebook, Identified has already created listings for more than 50 million people, although only 150K of those people are active monthly users. But that’s just in six weeks since the launch of its beta. Already, tens of thousands of people are accessing Identified Scores each day to evaluate professionals for recruiting, sales, networking, background checks, and more. What’s more, over 1.8 million scores have been viewed to date, and Wallace says that thousands of companies have already requested access to these scores to pre-screen candidates for recruiting. But the real value here, Wallace said, is that the average age of the Identified user is 24, and over 90 percent of its users are under the age of 30. With companies vying, categorically, to hire the best young talent, Identified offers businesses an easy, score-based (and relevance-based search) method of finding that talent.  Today, Identified is officially launching out of its public beta, and will now be offering free and open access (for both companies and the public) to the scores of those 50 million-odd professionals. This means that all Identified Scores are now public and will be searchable and accessible to anyone on the Web (and will pop up in Google searches) — companies included. Privacy settings will be included, thankfully.  And to that point, Identified also offers scores for over 60,000 companies and more than 8,000 universities, and Wallace said that many of the early signups the company has seen have come from employees wanting to add more relevant information to the listings of their company or university to up their scores. It’s this kind of gamification that can be a huge legup for Identified. As Identified Scores go up based on interest from other users or companies (by way of number of views, clicks, and actual hires), the more one adds to their profile, the higher the likelihood becomes that their score will go up, presumably based on their being placed higher in search rankings. Wallace believes that this “the more you add, the higher you’re ranked”, gamified approach presents a higher degree of opportunity for engagement among users, as interaction with their rankings have real world, and career implications. Of course, having made their scores public so that anyone can now view the scores of 50 million people, there’s some potential here for controversy, but Identified has built in controls so that non-Identified users can only view those profiles of companies and individuals that are registered users. Yet, the other question for Identified’s ranking system is: What if you didn’t go to an Ivy League school, but you’re still an awesome engineer, for example? Since the point of building its platform on top of Facebook data is to allow people to create networks around the friends and associates they actually interact with (and count as “Friends” on Facebook), if a user shows impressive career history and strong connections/relationships to top engineers, then not having gone to a “top school” becomes less relevant.  Of course, Identified Scores are not meant to be reflective of a person’s “actual worth” — just because you have a “65” and your friend has an “80”, doesn’t necessarily mean that your friend is a better person, is smarter, etc. In a sense, the company’s scores are like stock prices, in that they don’t necessarily reflect one’s true inherent value, they are based on relevant criteria — in this case to search terms. The scores aren’t perfect.  Even so, Identified adds a level of transparency to the labor market and opens a channel of communication between companies and professionals that has been incomplete to date. Being able to see how “in demand” you are based on your professional history, which companies are looking for employees like you, and how, in turn, you can make yourself more attractive to employers — is a valuable step forward for the professional networking space.  It’s not perfect yet, but it’s a step in the right direction. Whether or not Identified becomes a potential target for acquisition by LinkedIn or just a flat out competitor remains to be seen. But, according to Wallace, they’ve seen that some recognizable names at LinkedIn have been checking out the site.  And investors are certainly interested, as the startup has already raised $5.5 million from Google Chairman Eric Schmidt, Bill and Tim Draper, former Facebook VP Chamath Palihapitiya, Farmville Founder Zao Yang, among others.  For more on Identified, check ’em out here, or see Robin’s initial coverage here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Recipe search engine Foodily is arriving on mobile today, with an all-new iPhone application that will allow users to search recipes while on the go, see what recipes their friends have liked and share their own recommendations via photos snapped with the iPhone’s camera. In addition to the social features, the app provides mobile access to Foodily’s recipe search engine, so you can find the ingredients you need for a dish while you’re out and about. There’s a little bit of a Foodspotting feel to the new Foodily iPhone app, as it also lets you snap and share photos of delicious creations and share them with friends. Recipes and photos can be shared directly to Foodily’s website as well as to your wider social network via the app’s Facebook integration, which takes full advantage of the new “Open Graph” features introduced at F8. But while Foodspotting is about finding and sharing great dishes at local restaurants, Foodily’s photo-taking feature is about sharing dishes you’ve created yourself. It’s not just about bragging, though. The photos you take via Foodily are attached to the recipe online, so people can see how it actually turned out. There’s even a so-called “Yummify” feature that enhances mobile photos so they appear more like high-quality pics when shared on the network. (Specifically, the app increases the contrast optimizing for white point, sharpens the image and increases the color saturation, if you must know). To discover new recipes, there’s the Foodily recipe search engine which supports email, in case you need to remind yourself, a friend or family member about the ingredients you’ll need to buy later on. Although there are plenty of competitors in the recipe search space, Foodily has some momentum, having already raised $5 million from Index Ventures. The service was founded by former Yahoo’ers (Yahooligans?) Andrea Cutright and Hillary Mickell. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Virident, a company that offers flash-based storage solutions for enterprise, announced today that it has closed a $21 million series C funding round. The investment was led by Globespan Capital Partners, with strategic investments from Intel Capital, Cisco and contributions from existing investors, Sequoia Capital and Artiman Ventures. The series C round brings Virident to a total of $37 million in funding. So why the interest in Virident? For starters, the startup’s management team counts former Google, Sun Microsystems, Cisco, SGI, and Intel employees among its ranks. So it has some talent. Second, the (enterprise) storage space is hot. And Virident has built flash solutions that are compatible with any servers and allow enterprises to enhance not only the speed of their applications but to ensure reliable performance under heavy workloads, specifically for data-intensive workloads, like databases, business analytics, simulation, visualization and high-performance computing. Virident is operating under the belief that bringing flash memory to the storage space (both for data centers and enterprise storage) will fundamentally disrupt how information is stored. As Virident CEO  Kumar Ganapathy told infoTECH, a future may well be coming in which the very flash memory chips that are built into billions of smartphones today force data centers “to adopt a completely new storage architecture with massive cost reductions and a significantly smaller footprint”. For Virident, the future is all about solid state devices.  Thus, the funding announcement today goes hand-in-hand with the company’s introduction of the next generation of its flagship product, Virident FlashMAX. The new product, according to the company, allows enterprise application performance to be optimized and, something that they reiterate over and over — consistent over time, across a wide variety of dataset sizes and diverse workloads — while “providing at least twice the performance of comparably flash-based solutions”. The product also comes with built-in, Flash-aware RAID.  Virident will use its series C round for market expansion and product iteration. For more on FlashMAX, check it out here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last night, over 500 people gathered in San Francisco for the eighth Founder Showcase, a quarterly startup pitch event that brings together technology CEOs, investors, and early-stage startups for a night of networking and pitchin’. The event is hosted by Founder Institute, but is an open competition — any early-stage business (less than two years old and with under $250K in funding) can enter. And they don’t have to pay.  Public voting reduces the applicants to a group of quarterfinalists, from which the finalists are chosen by Founder Institute, among others. At last night’s event, ten companies took the stage to pitch in front of a panel of judges that included VCs from Morgenthaler Ventures, Javelin Venture Partners, Blumberg Capital, and K9 Ventures.  Taking home the “Grand Prize” was Neo, a startup that finances car loans for first and second-time car buyers. While most consumer loans are dependent on credit scores, Neo is looking to go beyond these shaky indicators of creditworthiness by taping into financial and social data to better evaluate prospective loan applicants and to provide more affordable car loans. Each year there are 6 million first and second time buyers with limited credit history looking for a loan, but 40 percent of those people are declined, while those that are approved generally have to struggle with interest rates that are 10 percent and higher.  While loan institutions are risk averse and shun away from offering money to those without significant credit histories, the default percentage even for subprime car loans is three percent, the founders say, because people simply need their cars and tend not to default on payments for this important asset. This is especially true for young, Gen Y car buyers, which make up 40 percent of the car buying population — a demographic which just doesn’t have significant credit histories. FICO, one of the biggest credit scoring systems, tends to be an imperfect indicator of creditworthiness, so Neo’s underwriting technology assesses realtime credit risk based on numerous resources, refinancing loan applicants to as little as 6 percent rates. The startup is partnering with dealerships during its beta, which will send the startup 20 to 40 applications per month to assess their credit risk, on which Neo will make $600 per transaction. Below, you can check out Neo’s pitch and the responses from judges: The runner up was I-DISPO, a community for sharing and booking appointments online. The Paris-based startup recently secured a partnership with Bing in France to power all restaurant reservations directly on the search results page. At the event, I-Dispo also announced their entry into the U.S. market. A quick look at the other startups pitching: Be Scrappy is an online marketplace that connects people who need tools for home improvement and do-it-yourself projects with lenders that have them. The startup just launched with four tool rental locations in San Francisco and will soon enable peer-to-peer rentals. ClientMagnet is an online service that helps SMBs drive retention by analyzing their customers and then recommending a marketing strategy based on hundreds of ready to run print, web and email campaigns. Explorence makes outdoor video games, turning your phone into a Wii and you into the controller. (Read TechCrunch’s coverage here.) Gushcloud is a social media platform where users get rewarded for promoting the brands they like, and companies can reach their target audience with any budget. Pllop is an About.me for creative expression. It allows you to easily create touch-enabled micro-sites that work great on both tablets and desktops. Say Mmm makes meal planning and grocery shopping simple with a set of online tools that do the work for you. The company’s latest feature will automatically convert any recipe or recipe URL into an organized grocery list with nutritional information. Takeoff is an online tool that makes it easy to collaborate during video production. It’s like Basecamp, but for video.  TouchBase is a private family network that builds trust by enabling sharing of things like location and status, without tracking a child’s every move.  Also of note: Founder Institute announced last night that it will be “rebranding”, as it was able to secure the “fi.co” domain name, joining 500 Startups and Angel List startup resources operating under the “.co” domain. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mixel is a new iPad app that just hit the App Store, but it’s also a new art medium. Mixel allows users to assemble collages by manipulating images pulled from their device, Facebook photos, and Bing search. It’s different from glue and paper cut-outs and existing collage apps, though, because every finished Mixel creation is publicly available for other users to pick apart, remix, and share. Forget the sanctity of something hung in a gallery, Mixel’s tag line is “Please touch the art”. The app has been in development in New York’s Dogpatch Labs since February by Lascaux Co., founded by former New York Times digital design director Khoi Vinh and MIT computer science grad Scott Ostler. The background of the founders mirrors the intention of the app — to combine art and technology to democratize creative expression. Vinh tells me he wants art to be something you can make “while you’re on the couch, you don’t have to be sitting at a desk or standing at an easel.” Mixel is simple to use, but the remix feature provides depth so there’s always something to do. You start by cropping down some source images and adding them to a canvas. Then you resize and position the elements to create a finished Mixel before sharing it to Facebook, Twitter, or Tumblr. Links lead to a standalone web view of a Mixel, similar to Instagram. Mixels can also be browsed within the app by following friends or checking out a Popular tab of creations with the most Likes and Loves.  If you discover a single image or entire work you want to use, you can start a remix with it. These are threaded into a conversation with the original work in the app’s galleries and the web view. This lets you see how different people interpet the same subject, and lends the app to deep social interactions where you collaborate with strangers or play around with friends. Currently there are no privacy controls in Mixel. Everything’s public, which the app warns you of if you add your own photos. Lascaux has secured $600,000 in seed funding from investors including Polaris Venture Partners, Betaworks, and Allen & Company, plus a $100,000 TechFellow award from Founders Fund and New Enterprise Associates. Its next steps include adding Flickr, Tumblr, and Pinterest as image sources as well as privacy controls for sharing Mixels with small groups of friends. Lascaux is also planning an iPhone app that instead of being a shrunk-down clone of the app will be a complement for browsing Mixels, leaving feedback, and saving images for later user. Collage creation will be reserved for the big screened iPad. Built on an instantly familiar multi-touch display, those of all ages will soon be exploring the Mixel medium. Vinh explains that, “We don’t want art to be something monumental that makes people feel intimidated. Rather, we want to take people that would never really engage with art apps and turn them into engaged, passionate visual communicators.” Mixel is now available for iPad in the App Store.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The iPhone in your pocket can do a lot more than just play games or music. Used properly, that computer can help save your life. Consumer health apps are increasingly hitting iTunes.  The latest one to appear today is Glooko (iTunes).   Glooko is a digital logbook for people with diabetes who have to check their blood sugar every day.  There are dozens of glucose logbooks in iTunes, but almost all of them require manual entry.  What makes Glooko different is that the company designed a $40 cable (sold separately) that works with six of the top glucose meters.  You just plug it into both devices and it downloads your daily readings. The app itself is free.  It lets you mark whether the reading was done before or after a meal, add notes, and email or fax a 14-day summary to your doctor.  The company charges for the cable.  “What people want to do is download these readings into Apple devices,” explains co-founder Anita Mathew.  “Many of these meters don’t work with Apple devices.”  There are an estimated 19 million diabetics in the U.S. alone, and 17 million of them test their blood sugar levels.  By 2025, one in five people in the U.S. is projected to have diabetes. Simply connecting these medical devices to iPhones creates a market opportunity, but this is just the first step. Once Glooko starts collecting diabetes data it could start to analyze it (although there are regulatory barriers—just plotting the data points on a graph requires FDA clearance).  It could also charge for premium features.  Glooko is an ambitious startup.  It’s chairman and co-founder is Yogen Dalal (Xerox Parc, Mayfield Fund).  Mathew worked for ten years in product marketing at Johnson & Johnson, where she helped launch several glucose meters. The third co-founder is Sundeep Madra. Glooko also has some serious backers.  The startup raised a $1 million seed round in November, 2010 from Chamath Palihapitiya‘s Social+Capital fund, Bill Campbell, Vint Cerf, Andy Hertzfeld, Judy Estrin, Bumptop founder Anand Agarawala, Kosmix co-founders Venky Harinarayan and Annad Rajaraman, Russel Hirsch, and Xtreme Labs.  The company lends some of its Palo Alto office space to Social+Capital. Latest headlines delivered to you daily AVOS, the startup behind the newly re-launched Delicious.com, has acquired the link-saving service Trunk.ly, the company announced in a blog post this afternoon. AVOS, which is led by YouTube founders Chad Hurley and Steve Chen, says that Trunk.ly’s “technology and insights will accelerate link-saving and searching capabilities in Delicious.” Trunk.ly itself was founded in December 2010 by Tim Bull and Alex Dong, and offered its users the ability to save all the links they “liked” or favorited on social services such as Twitter, Facebook and LinkedIn, all organized into one place. Funny, it seems like only yesterday that Trunk.ly co-founder Bull was commenting on TechCrunch, how the “new Delicious looks great, but we think automation (collecting links for you across your social graph) and search (forget tagging, just build a personal “google” of the sites you like) are where it’s at.” Looks like AVOS must have agreed. Trunk.ly says its service will now be discontinued and it will cease accepting sign-ups today. Full shut down is planned for two months out, so you can migrate your links elsewhere. (Cough, Delicious, cough?) Latest headlines delivered to you daily BiteHunter, the new mobile app for finding nearby dining deals, has just completed a $800,000 funding round. The round was led by angel investors Avraham Kadar, M.D. and Eyal Chomsky. The funding will be used to provide additional resources for the development of new features, an expansion to other platforms, and ongoing maintenance of BiteHunter’s deals database. The app, sometimes described as a “Kayak for restaurants,” launched on iOS back in June, initially in New York, San Francisco and Chicago. In October, the company launched a major upgrade which included integration with hundreds more dining deals sources including Yelp Deals, Groupon Now and LivingSocial Instant. The newly added time-limited deals are now featured within the app’s new “BiteNow” section, showing you discounted dining options you can access on the go. With the new funding, BiteHunter says it will soon add a personalized deal recommendation notification system and the option for its users to purchase deals on the go, without having to register at all the different deal providers. BiteHunter plans to serve as the middleman between you and the deal you want, so you can purchase the deal in the mobile app with credit card information you have on file. The plan is for BiteHunter to house 70-80% of the deals in the U.S., BiteHunter CEO and Co-Founder Gil Harel told us recently. BiteHunter 1.3 is available here in iTunes. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Location-based social planning platform Hotlist (formerly “The Hotlist”), is launching a revamped website and iPhone application today, with an increased focus on ease-of-use, improved discovery of upcoming activities and events, and better tools for coordinating plans with your friends. According to Co-founder and CEO Chris Mirabile, the company is also nearing the close of its next round of funding to the tune of approximately $1 million+, raised primarily from angel investors (via AngelList) and previous investor Centurion Holdings, among others. “When you think of other location-based services, like Facebook and Foursquare, it’s about what’s already happened in the past, it’s a more historical view,” explains Mirabile. Hotlist, instead, wants to help you find out what’s going to be happening in the future. It does this by tapping into users’ Facebook profiles to see what events users’ friends plan to attend. It also aggregates public data to show which places will be trending nearby. Hotlist users are then offered recommendations based on a combination of factors: their friends, places, events and the brands they follow. With the update, Hotlist has added the ability to take “virtual peeks” into venues hours or days ahead of the actual events in order to see event details, photos of those planning to attend, and who among their Facebook friends plans on going. The other notable new feature is the “Planner” which helps users determine the best place and time to meet up with friends. Users can specify up to 5 locations and times and friends select which ones work best. However, the best part of Hotlist’s update may be the redesign. If you remember what the app and website used to look like, you’ll likely be pleasantly surprised by the changes which make the service much easier to use. Hotlist says it now has over 100 million plans in its system for over 2.7 million venues in over 40,000 cities. Mirabile says that the service has also grown to half a million users since launch. The new app is in iTunes now, but an updated version will arrive in just a couple of hours with additional bug fixes.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest writer Joseph Puopolo is an entrepreneur and start-up enthusiast, who blogs on a variety of topics including green initiatives, technology and marketing. Have you been waiting for a taxi to come take you to an airport and it never comes? Or worse yet, you have ordered a car and don’t know where it is. A Toronto based company named Winston aims to change the way you call for a taxi or limo. Launching today exclusively in Toronto, Winston is going direct to cab or car companies and pitching a different way to operate. Instead of high overhead dispatch, which can be hit and miss they are leveraging the customer, GPS and integrated credit card functions to change the game. Sounds a lot like  Uber, but Winston’s prime focus is around the business user. The business traveler typically has very different needs than an average traveler. The launch of the app is currently limited to Toronto, Canada, but they will be rolled out in New York, Chicago, Los Angeles and San Francisco by the end of the year. Winston is negotiating agreements currently with international providers and will be in multiple markets in Europe and Asia in 2012.Winston believes it will win out by leveraging broader distribution and greater adoption across more cities. Uber is currently available in 5 cities. “Our customers will be everywhere, we need to be everywhere they are” says Aidan Nulman CEO of Winston.  With Winston, rather than picking up the phone, you will be able to order a cab at the touch of a button using the Winston app. While waiting for your ride you can track it approaching via GPS. When you complete your ride, rather than having to reach for your wallet, you just leave the car and the payment is handled via Winston. The payment is tracked via the app, it tracks the pick-up and drop-off location and time spent and charges a credit card on file appropriately. Whether you want either a cab or a limo, a prospective passenger can order either. Limousines obviously come at a premium and a minimum cost of 50 dollars. Winston has already negotiated numerous agreements with cab and limousine companies. Winston has received significant interest from corporations looking to manage employee expenses. One of the key reasons for this is that tax chits can often be abused by employees while traveling. As well, for employees, keeping track of travel expenses is often the last thing they want to do. All in all, this is ideal for a busy business traveler who is getting off a flight to catch a business meeting. This expedites and automates the entire process. Winston derives revenue by taking a percentage of each ride and sees many other potential revenue streams. Winston was founded In January 2011 by Aidan Nulman, Yilun Zhang, and Krista Caldwell. Winston is in The Next 36 program, an entrepreneurship program designed to groom the next generation of entrepreneurs. Winston has worked closely with advisors from Canadian incubator MaRs and other entrepreneurs to get this venture off of the ground. The Winston app is now available on the App Store here, check it out. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Restaurant reservations service OpenTable is launching a completely redesigned mobile website today based on HTML5. The company says it was prompted to make the changes due to customer demand. Since 2008, the company has seated more than 15 million diners through both its mobile website and apps, representing over $600 million in revenue for its restaurant customers. These days, OpenTable mobile solutions account for more than 1 million diners seated per month. The updated website offers a new look and feel, and was designed with a focused effort to better mirror the mobile app experience. Like OpenTable’s native apps, the site can now use geolocation to find nearby restaurants with tables available. Diners can also refine searches by neighborhood, cuisine and price, plus access photos, maps, menus and parking info. In addition, it also offers the most highly requested feature: reviews from other OpenTable diners. The updated website is currently supported on Android, iPhone, Windows Phone and BlackBerry devices, which is kind of funny, considering that the company already has apps for all those platforms. It seems that no matter how big you get, you can never ignore the biggest platform of them all: the Web. OpenTable also recently added a new Android Honeycomb (tablet) app, updated its Windows Phone app to support Mango’s Live Tiles for reservation reminders and updated its iOS apps to allow users to export reservations to their calendars. In an accompanying infographic, OpenTable revealed a few more tidbits of data, including the following: Latest headlines delivered to you daily On the heels of inking a deal with DailyMotion, AnyClip is today announcing a content licensing agreement with Warner Bros. Digital Distribution. Full movies from the movie studio, including the Harry Potter and Batman franchise, will be fully searchable for any object, character, location, scene or emotion.  Other titles covered by the agreement include Ocean’s Eleven, 300, Superman, The Wizard of Oz, Lethal Weapon, Dirty Harry, Casablanca, Se7en and The Shining. AnyClip’s online library now includes access to over 12,000 films and over 50,000 live clips, including titles from the likes of Universal Pictures, Vivendi Entertainment, and Indie distribution firms such as First Look and Virgil Films. In addition, AnyClip is today launching a completely revamped consumer site, featuring the option to purchase full length films via Netflix, Amazon, and iTunes (see screenshot below).  The new site will also include special features, such as targeted advertising and a call-to-action to purchase the songs featured in each clip (think Shazam for online video).   Latest headlines delivered to you daily We just can’t get away from the social recommendations space, can we? Just this past month, we’ve seen new startups like Oink and Wikets arrive, and even a hilarious spoof of the trend via the fake startup Jotly. Well, now you can add another startup to the list, because today, a new social recommendations service for small businesses called BestVendor is opening its doors, too. And it already has $600,000 in seed funding from Peter Thiel, SVAngel, SoftBank Capital and Lerer Ventures to get things going. Now launching into public beta, what BestVendor offers is a free, online directory of Web services, online applications and software specially designed for startups or other small businesses. Eventually, the site wants to become the go-to resource to find everything you need for your company. What’s interesting about the way BestVendor operates, however, is its social component. The service requires that you sign in with your LinkedIn ID, so it automatically knows who’s in your network. Further down the road, it will add support for Facebook and Twitter, too, we’re told. BestVendor requires that you recommend three products at sign up, in order to kick start its database of recommendations. In its pre-launch state, the service already has 3,500 products on hand and allows you to add others as need be. While browsing the site, you can continue to click on products you’ve used to build your list of recommended apps and services. You can filter through the community’s recommended applications by category (design, development, finance, sales, etc.) or by people or company. By default, BestVendor shows you all the recommendations from its user base either as a list of users (the People tab) or businesses (the Companies tab), but for a more personal slice of the aggregated data, you can choose to filter this list so it only shows recommendations from your LinkedIn network. And you can further refine the recommendations by industry (e.g., Finance, Government, Health, etc.) using the left-hand navigation.  There are dozens of other little features that make the site pleasurable to use and instantly addictive, like the “cool fact” sidebar that shows the top 5 recommended apps for any given industry list, the “request a note” feature that lets you initiate conversations around the products in question, and the little “I use this buttons” that like you both like an item and see how many others use that app, too. There’s no gimmick here, like on BestVendor’s consumer-focused counterparts, Oink and Wikets, for example, which respectively promise either “cred” or gift cards for your participation. Instead, the reward in using BestVendor comes from the value the site itself delivers – being able to see what your colleagues use, have used and recommend in terms of work-related apps. That’s kind of a reward in and of itself. Even as a heavy Web service user myself, BestVendor was able to recommend a thing or two I’d now like to try, which surprised me. The only drawback to the site is the manual labor required to fill the database. But those “I use this buttons” are just so darned clickable. The recommendations come easily.  BestVendor’s business model will eventually encompass affiliate listings, referrals, product reselling and enhanced vendor listings that offer videos and screenshots. Along with Jeff Giesea, BestVendor’s other co-founders include Ben Zhuk and Magnus von Koeller. The team began work on the product in January 2011, but didn’t start on it full time until May, when Zhuk and von Koeller completed their classes at Columbia Business School. By June, BestVendor had their first round of seed funding, and the company plans to close its Series A next March. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Verious, the one-stop shop for mobile app components and TechCrunch Disrupt 2011 finalist, is today emerging from its beta period with a bang. It’s announcing a partnership with online employment platform Elance, which will bring over 25,000 mobile professionals to Verious’ existing network of mobile component developers. Through the partnership, Verious will offer two new categories within its marketplace: “Find Contract Developers” and “Find Mobile App Projects.” These sections will serve to connect product managers, brand managers and business owners with mobile developers on development projects. Developers will be able to list their capabilities, qualifications and ratings from past projects for others to see, while also bidding on the current projects posted to the site. Also new is a suite of Small Business Solutions which Verious will offer to businesses looking to quickly launch mobile apps. Businesses will have access to pre-built “white label” apps from a range of providers starting at $399, plus access to a developer community who can help customize their app’s landing pages, splash screens, buttons or who can alternately build new apps from scratch. Expanded license management capabilities for components and SDKs are available now, too. Verious is entering an increasingly crowded market with its mobile component marketplace, where competitors now include Chupa, Appcelerator’s Open Mobile Marketplace and Binpress, to name just a few. Each outlet attempts to differentiate itself from the others through the platforms supported, the size of the listings on the site, their feature set, or some other factor. For Verious, it appears to be going after the “one-stop shop” label, with these recent moves which sees it not only listing mobile app components, but offering services associated with app building as well. The company, founded in 2011, has $800,000 in seed funding and is backed investors including Charles River Ventures, X-G Ventures, plus angels Mark Britto, Iggy Fanlo, Gil Penchina, Krishna Vedati, Thomas Schulz and Zain Khan.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Medialets, which provides a rich media ad platform for mobile, has raised another $8.4 million in equity funding according to an SEC filing published this morning. We’ve contacted the company to learn more about the investment, but it’s likely the funding was partly or entirely provided by earlier backers Foundry Group, DFJ Gotham Ventures and/or 500 Startups. Medialets has raised a total of $18.4 million in funding to date. Some of our earlier coverage: Medialets Updates Universal SDK With Third-Party Rich Media Support, New Mobile Ad Formats And More Medialets Launches Muse, A Creative Project Management Dashboard For Rich Media Mobile Ads Adobe Just Made Medialets Its Mobile Ad Server Latest headlines delivered to you daily Expense reports are a pain in the ass, which is why David Barrett founded Expensify in May 2008. Since then, the startup has raised nearly $7 million in funding and added a number of features, like receipt automation, to its platform that allows users to collect and automatically categorize your transaction records. Users register their credit cards with Expensify, and they import eReceipts, tag expenses, and send a copy of your expenses over to your company’s bookkeeper.  Today, the service made some further announcements about the progress it’s made in taking the suck out of your expense reports. For starters, Barrett says that over 90,000 organizations and 650,000 individuals are now using the service. These organizations using Expensify run the gamut, including names like Evernote, Square and Tumblr.  Besides the company’s 10 percent month-on-month baseline growth, the Founder says, the platform has seen a sizable rise in signups thanks to its Evernote integration and its becoming an Android “Staff Pick”.   While Barrett says that its “bottom up” sales model (where users sign up for a freemium product that results in a premium upsell for their company), they’ve found that the sale requires more advanced functionality and working directly with customers. As a result, Expensify is launching a salesforce focused on companies between 100 and 1,000 employees, with a number of features for employee administration and accounting integration.  But the salesforce won’t be cold calling anybody, it only works with current freemium customers, he says, to help them “get over the hump”. To support this mission and for overall streamlining, Expensify is splitting its “one size fits all” pricing into a few basic plans: “Personal” for those using Expensify for personal finance, “Professional” for contractors and freelancers, “Team” for small companies under 100 employees, and “Corporate” for midsize companies over 100 employees. There are also two major changes inherent to the new plans, one of which is that every account now gets a monthly quota of 10 free receipt scans, with the option to buy more. The second major change is the introduction of domain-based admin features that allow users to “claim” their domain and get administrative control over any account with an email address ending in their domain name, as well as an advanced “GL code” integration with external accounting packages. Though Expensify is not yet profitable, Barrett says that the company has been able to build “meaninful revenue” with steady growth and will likely not need to raise more than the $6.7 million it raised in 2009 and 2010.  The CEO said that he thinks that the company has “stubled into an incredible combination of freemium economics and viral growth in a market with thick enterprise margins”. If customers respond to the new pricing plan and salesforce with the same gusto they’ve shown for its features to date, the future may very well be bright for this San Francisco startup.   For more on the new Expensify, see the company’s blog post on the announcement here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Let me introduce you to Pota-Toss, a gorgeous potato tossing artillery game currently seeking Kickstarter funding for development. It’s like Scorched Earth, or Angry Birds but where you aim at the bases of human opponents instead of computer pigs. What makes Pota-Toss special is that the beautifully drawn levels correspond to the GPS-location and local time of the players. If it’s 6pm and I’m playing from New York, I’ll play in front of the NYC skyline at sunset. Pota-Toss just showed up on Kickstarter on Friday, where the Costa Rican developer Saborstudio is looking for a lean $7,000 to finish production of an iOS version. With gorgeous level art, goofy characters, a proven physics-based game concept, and a sprinkling of innovation, I think Pota-Toss could be a hit. [Update: Pota-Toss has reached its Kickstarter goal. Saborstudios should consider continuing to raise funding as it will need top notch engineering talent to get the game to market.] The developers seem to think so too because they’re not looking for venture capital yet. I’d imagine they want to get into the App Store and gain some traction before giving away too much equity at too low a valuation. Instead, big backers of their Kickstarter will get a piece of potato ammo with their name and face, or their own logo on one of the game’s backdrops. The funding will go towards legal fees, licenses, development and testing equipment, and manpower. A bit more on the premise of Pota-Toss (pronounced Po Tay Toss). Players can compete with friends on the same device or any opponent over the internet. They take turns flinging, rather than slingshotting, potatoes with different characteristics in an attempt to hit their opponent’s base. The game’s creator Phillip Casorla Sagot tells me he was originally inspired because “There’s a lack of simple head-to-head mobile games.” Saborstudio aims to launch Pota-toss with over 200 levels featuring obstacles corresponding to different locations around the world, and they plan to release more levels for better coverage of the world’s varying terrain in monthly updates. If two distant players are competing, their level will be split down the middle between the different local times and terrains. The graphical style is rich and textured, with a combination of water colors and paper cut-outs that I can see myself happy to gaze at while waiting for a friend to shoot. There are certainly some issues despite the basic premise seeming awesome. Even with the option to compete against someone next to you, requiring a human opponent can cause delays and limit how people play. A solid single player mode would be advised. Also, the developers will have to find a way to equalize the difficulty of different terrains so someone who lives near the Grand Canyon isn’t unbeatable because they’re protected by a cliff. The potatoes themselves already look kinda cute and goofy, though they still might not be quite as franchise-worthy as the cast of Angry Birds. Monetization strategies could include in-app purchases of more powerful potato ammo similar to the Golden Eagle, special defenses for your base, and levels containing popular landmarks. Paid versions could be released for different seasons. I’m imagining the Statue of Liberty covered in snow or triggering a landslide of Easter eggs into my opponent’s base. Judging from their plucky, endearing Kickstarter video, the developers already have a good sense of marketing. I’m confident they would have reached their funding goal without this article. But I love the intersection between art and technology, and I love games, and I want to play Pota-Toss soon.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in July, a new cloud computing and productivity platform called CX.com raised $5 million from Eric Schmidt’s Tomorrow Ventures and Hanna Capital, bringing the startup’s total funding to $10 million. This is pretty impressive considering the company largely has been flying under the radar since its launch earlier this year. But CX is now officially ready to share the official news of their production release, a platform that enables users to backup, synchronize, share, and manage their data in the cloud — from any device to any device.  This includes the ability to sync new, changed, offline or deleted files to all connected computers, maintaining a history for all of your devices as you make changes. What’s more, users can take advantage of realtime backup, synchronized file sharing among groups, across multiple platforms, including desktops, laptops, netbooks, and mobile devices. CX’s CEO Brad Robertson tells us that, through offering a 10 GB account for free, the company isn’t just trying to launch a lame marketing tactic to entice users, the company wants to make a bolder statement about the industry: That storage and sharing companies don’t have to set a low limit in which users will quickly hit their quote and be forced to pay.  So, CX is giving away 10 GB for free and is only deducting storage space from the group creator, not every single user that the person shares with, nor does it include the size of their unlimited file revisions from their users’ quota.  Free services are available for up to three groups, and users receive 10 GB of free storage. For $10 a month, customers can create 10 groups with unlimited group size and take advantage of realtime notifications, with 50 GB of storage. At $20 a month, groups are unlimited, and storage is at 100 GBs. By being transparents about how much they charge and by offering a realtime collaboration and social graph infrastructure, CX aims to become more than a storage commodity, but a platform that enables users to discover, search, and find their content in realtime.  The new production release also offers all customers groups, even free users, with the capability to add up to 1 million members per group. The company also has a realtime notifications suite and collaboration feature set in limited beta that looks to be launched by the end of the year. Along with its production release, CX is also announcing that it has added Keith Pardy to its management team. Pardy was the former CMO at RIM, and has previously worked at Coke as well as Nokia.  Will Lowry, Chief Product Designer and architect. CX’s new platform is available with apps for the Web, Mac, PC, iPad, and iPhone, with Android and BlackBerry releases coming before the holidays. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Finding great talent is a tough process. Recruiters and HR try to find out as much as they can about job candidates who purposefully seek to hide their own flaws. Resumes, interviews, and listed references help, but what employers really need to know is how a candidate actually performs at work. SocialCheck.me is a brand new service that lets employers distribute opt-in, anonymous, private, customizable surveys to the colleagues and past co-workers of job candidates. Employers get data, charts, and calculations about a candidate’s quality which they can use to hire competent, hard working candidates that will fit their company’s culture. SocialCheck.me is launching its beta today and our readers can get free access by going here, entering their email address, and then entering TECHCRUNCH as the signup code. There’s currently a shortage of top talent, especially engineers, and many think teams make or break a business. The wasted time and momentum from employing a crappy worker and having to re-hire can be devastating. Unfortunately, many past employers refuse to give qualitative assessments of past employees, and references listed on a resume can be biased in the candidate’s favor. The bootstrapped SocialCheck.me started working on this problem 10 months ago and now has a solution. Employers create a custom survey for a job opening, and ask candidates to send it on to their colleagues. Respondents anonymously pass their reviews to the employer, but have their identity and connection to the candidate verified through LinkedIn. Others in the space such as Honestly, Duedil, and Mixtent create public profiles that aren’t customized to assess a candidate’s fit for a particular job. They also aren’t focused on empowering hiring managers to solicit reviews of a particular candidate. Ways to game SocialCheck.me are limited. Candidates could refuse to forward the surveys, but this could indicate they have something to hide and other candidates with positive responses could get the job instead. Candidates could ask friends for glowing reviews, but respondents could say they will and still give an objective assessment, or note the sleazy request in their response since candidates never see the answers. If a candidate can’t get responses because they have a sparse network, employers might wonder why they’re behind the times or why no one wants to connect with them. In the future, SocialCheck.me plans to add other respondent verification methods, and might expand into an end-to-end hiring suite or add other features. Lately I’ve seen a proliferation of social recruiting solutions that let hiring managers distribute openings or search for candidates on Facebook and other social networks. This tool lets recruiters make the best decision of who to pick from their enlarged candidate pool. People who make great employees should have nothing to hide. SocialCheck.me is a powerful way to confirm new hires will perform just as well as they say.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Federated Sample, a New Orleans-based market research technology firm, announced today that it has raised a $2.8 million series A round of financing. The investment was led by Sopris Capital and early-stage New Orleans VC firm, Voodoo Ventures. As part of the round, Sopris Capital Founder and Partner Jon Kaiden will be joining the startup’s board of directors. So what is it that Federated Sample does? Put simply, the company focuses on bringing efficiency and automation to online sampling. Its flagship product, Fulcrum, is an enterprise-level sample management platform and white-label routing solution that aims to improve the survey-taking experience and reduce costs for businesses.  Thanks to the growing use of routing, Federated Sample offers its optimization engine to customers that want to use a proprietary panel to decrease dependence on third-party sample providers. Every complete generated by the panel eliminates the need for these businesses to buy outside samples, increasing the user’s margins and improving deliverability. Fulcrum uses a set of proprietary APIs to connect to panel companies and data collection software to automate the sample delivery process. Of course, when a company is buying market research surveys, they want to know that respondents are who they say they are — one of the biggest challenges facing the industry as a whole. So, Federated Sample is developing realtime validation from public records without having to collect “Personally Identifiable Information”.  Voodoo Ventures Founder Chris Schultz says that he is excited by Federated Sample’s mission because, in creating an efficient market for the buying and selling of surveys, the startup is doing the same thing for market research that the big ad networks did for online advertising 10 years ago — bringing broad distribution and efficiency to the market. What’s more, Federated Sample counts three of the top five market research firms as clients already, and is seeing strong adoption, with 3.5 million respondents available per month and revenue growing 200 percent year-over-year for this quarter.  It’s also a great example of the type of disruptive technology companies that are popping up in New Orleans. For more on Federated Sample, check them out at home here. Federated Sample will use its new infusion of capital to roll out new features for its flagship product and ramp up hiring across all divisions.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Meet Scanadu, an innovative health tech startup I daresay you’ll be hearing a lot more from in the future. It’s not the easiest of tasks explaining what the company is building at this point, but let’s call it a personal, mobile, auto-diagnostics product – they refer to it as a Medical Tricorder. Founded in January 2011 by a team of entrepreneurs with diverse backgrounds, the roots of Scanadu actually go way back. One of the company’s founders, and its chief executive officer, is Walter De Brouwer – something of a legend here in Belgian entrepreneurial circles, and beyond. He says he had the basic idea for a personal health monitoring service back in 1999 when he was working at the renowned Starlab research institute, which he jump-started alongside MIT Media Lab founder Nicholas Negroponte. And from watching Star Trek. “Sci-fi stories are business plans in disguise,” De Brouwer tells me, referring to the invention of the mobile phone, which was inspired by the Star Trek communicator. “I’ve tried to build the Tricorder once before, in 1999 at Starlab, but the technology was too immature.”  De Brouwer says the idea resurfaced in his mind in 2006, when his son was hospitalized for 3 months following a serious accident. So he conjured up the idea of using one’s smartphone as a personal doctor of sorts, leveraging many of the things modern cellphones can do to help people auto-diagnose and manage many of the easily identifiable health conditions that may arise.  Scanadu’s first product, the ‘Medical Tricorder’, is built specifically with parents with kids in mind, and to help avoid expensive trips to hospitals based on insufficient information and/or anxiety. “Today, the health tools in your home probably consist of a thermometer and a box of band-aids. We can do a lot better,” says co-founder and COO Misha Chellam. The company has worked with IDEO to create a video that captures its core vision well that includes the quote I used for this posts’s headline, albeit paraphrased. You can watch it below. Scanadu has raised $2 million from a network of global angel investors, including Playfish co-founder Sebastien De Halleux, and is currently moving the team from Belgium to the San Francisco Bay Area (the lab is being established at NASA’s Research Park). The company is building a core team of biomedical engineers, software and hardware developers, and AI specialists. They also have a Medical Advisory Board that includes Stanford-affiliated Dr. Daniel Kraft and Dr. Jordan Shlain, founder of Healthloop and Current Health. Scanadu is currently seeking technology partnerships with telemedicine and diagnostic technology startups, and hiring more people to join its quest to build a personal ‘pocket doctor’.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMichael Birch’s WaterForward Is “Kind of a Chain Letter Pyramid Scheme” For CharityMichael Birch, the founder of Bebo and now CEO of startup lab Monkey Inferno, wants to raise millions of dollars for Charity:Water using social networks and viral loops.  His latest project is WaterForward, a non=profit which he describes as “kind of a chain letter pyramid scheme” applied to charity.  In the video interview above, he explains that “it is very easy to like a charity,” but getting people to give is much harder.  And that is what WaterForward is designed to do. The WaterForward concept is simple.  It is a way to pay charity forward to your friends.  You can donate $10 on behalf a friend, or multiple friends, and their name and picture gets placed in the online WaterForward book.  The only way to get in the book is if someone puts you there by donating on your behalf.  Once you are placed in the book, you are encouraged to pay it forward to someone else.  The site imports your Facebook and Twitter friends to make it easy.  (You can also donate on behalf of people you don’t know who might want to participate but are still waiting for someone to put them in the book). If this sounds a little like the Million Dollar Homepage that may be because it was designed by Alex Tew, the guy who created the Million Dollar Homepage in 2005.  Now, it’s for a good cause.  One hundred percent of the proceeds will go towards Charity:Water projects, which typically involve building wells in villages around the world for the estimated 1 billion people without easy access to fresh water. WaterForward launched a couple weeks ago, and so far has raised just over $150,000 with no marketing.  “I feel there is an inflection pont we haven’t quite reached,” says Birch.  Once you pay it forward, you can see your total impact of how many people are in the book because of you.  And if some of your friends haven’t paid it forward themselves, you can nudge them through the site.  It’s a slow start, but once this goes viral, it could end up raising a ton of money for Charity: Water.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Facebook has apparently completed yet another small acquisition, snapping up HTML5 app distribution platform company Strobe. In a blog post, Strobe founder (and creator of open source JavaScript framework SproutCore) Charles Jolley says the Strobe service will continue to exist in its current beta form. SproutCore will live on as an independent project, he adds. We’re happy to announce that, as of this week, the Strobe team is joining Facebook! Strobe was founded on the belief that HTML5 can transform the way average people use their mobile phones through apps that are available everywhere, anytime, on any device. Now we’re joining the talented people at Facebook to help develop innovative mobile experiences for their users around the world. For now, the Strobe service will continue to be available to existing users in its existing beta form. We will provide updates by email if and when this changes. SproutCore, meanwhile, will continue as an independent project. Strobe has been a fantastic adventure. Thank you to everyone who has supported us. We look forward to working with you again in our future roles. Sincerely, – The Strobe Team Strobe’s platform, which debuted back in September, helps developers build HTML5-based Web applications for desktops, smartphones and tablets, and lets them centrally manage them using a single interface. Sarah took a close look at Strobe when the service made its formal debut. The company had raised $2.5 million from O’Reilly AlphaTech and Hummer Winblad. Update: as expected, this is mostly a talent acquisition. A Facebook spokesperson says: We’re excited to confirm that we’ve completed a talent acquisition for Strobe Corp., a mobile app development startup based in San Francisco. Founder and CEO Charles Jolley will join our mobile engineering team, and we’re looking forward to the major impact the Strobe team will undoubtedly make at Facebook.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In September, Wikets, Inc., announced it had raised $1.5 million from venture firms Andreessen Horowitz and Battery Ventures, as well as from six angel investors, to build a new iPhone application that allows users to rate products and share those recommendations with friends. Today, the app has gone live in iTunes. The resulting product is deceptively simple. You make a recommendation, optionally share it with friends via Facebook or Twitter, and then get rewarded in the form of points that can be later turned in for gift cards at online merchants. At launch, Wikets lets you recommend products from its featured partners and from 60 major retailers, including iTunes (music and apps), Etsy, eBay, Amazon, Best Buy, The Home Depot, Wine.com, and others, as well as any place you can pull up on Yelp or Foursquare. You can also scan a product’s barcode, if you choose. Your recommendation, or “Rec” in Wikets’ lingo, is then shared within the app with your followers – that’s right, there’s a social networking component to Wikets, too. You can follow other users to see the products and places they like and can even “Re-Rec” those to your own friends, comment on them, or buy the product from within the app itself. In order to encourage usage, Wikets doles out points for your recommendations, other in-app activity, and, most importantly, your purchases. (100 points = $1.00 USD). These points can later be redeemed for gift cards from select merchants. But there’s a bit more to Wikets than a simple recommendations/reward system. In the app’s main stream, which includes all the recommendations on the service, there’s a search button to find recommendations from others or to find users by name, plus filters for popular recommendations, nearby recommendations and recommended people. As you browse through this stream, discovering new content, you can tap a button to add items to your wishlist or strike up a conversation around the item in question through a comments feature. These social features of the app make Wikets feel more a social network built around products and places, as opposed to yet another user reviews type service. At its core, however, Wikets isn’t all that different from Oink, the first app from Kevin Rose’s startup lab Milk. Like Wikets, Oink lets you rate items (well, actually anything – not just products and places), filter by location, popularity and more. Except in Oink’s case, you build up “cred” not points, and that cred doesn’t amount to much – certainly not real-world rewards. But Oink at least offers the ability to drill down to make granular recommendations – a particular beer at a bar, a dish at a restaurant, and so on. Arguably, all these recommendations, both on Oink or Wikets, could just as easily be added to any social, user reviews or check-in app, like Yelp, Facebook or Foursquare. There’s also the question of whether rewards are enough to keep users engaged on Wikets for an extended period of time, once the “shininess” wears off. There are always those who will do anything for a reward, whether that’s using a particular search engine or taking an online survey, but true engagement comes from building an addictive and enjoyable service or one that fills a real need (or even better, one that does both). For Wikets to be successful, it has to change users’ current behavior surrounding social recommendations – that is, it requires you to first recommend on Wikets and then share with friends on Facebook or Twitter. That’s the opposite of how we operate today. When you have a quick thought about the delicious dish you’re enjoying at a new restaurant, a great deal you just found, or a new app you love, we typically first take to social networks to make that recommendation. Perhaps Wikets would have been better if it built on top of that behavior – that is, it pulled in your recommendations from your social networks and then allowed you to rate them in the app. You can try Wikets for yourself here in iTunes. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInLivestream’s Max Haot on the Early DaysLivestream co-founder Max Haot says 30-million monthly unique viewers depend on Livestream for coverage of events ranging from Occupy Wall Street to f8. This year Livestream expects to more than double its 2010 revenue to $12.5-million and is rolling out enhancements that include a rewind in real-time option along with social media features. It’s a far cry from five years ago when Livestream was operating under a completely different name and was focused on owning a completely different space. Chris Dixon dives into the backstory in this episode of Founder Stories. Dial back to 2006/2007 and Haot was putting his team together while bootstrapping the company with a few hundred thousand dollars from a previous exit. He tells Dixon they had “the right product but the wrong vision.” Unveiled under the name Mogulus, the service was intended “to help bloggers create 24/7 live TV stations” but his team “realized bloggers don’t really have the resources, the monetization, the content, [or] the audience” that would propel Mogulus to success. However, they stumbled across something else that could – events. Sensing potential in the overall raw concept, angel investors swooped in to back the company and helped them mushroom to 120 employees. While expanding, Haot tells Dixon Livestream formulated a plan to fend off piracy. The startup keeps tabs on content new producers broadcast and limits them to 50-viewers, so if an infraction occurs damage is minimal. If larger producers stream copyrighted material, they’re shut down. He calls it a “zero-tolerance” approach. Make sure to watch the entire video for additional insights and check out past episodes of Founder Stories featuring Dropbox, Kickstarter, Reddit, Eventbrite, and Tumblr. Clarificiation: In the video above, Haot says Livestream launched the same week as Ustream. While he started working on Livestream around the same time that Ustream was incorporated (January, 2007), Ustream launched it’s service in March, 2007, whereas Livestream launched its service in May, 2007. Episode II of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For SMBs, managing banking and payment processes is not as easy — or as secure — as it should be. So, coming out of stealth today is a Boston-based startup called MineralTree that is looking to fix both of these problems. Tomorrow, at the Small Business Banking Conference in Scottsdale, Arizona, MineralTree will officially launch its first product: A cloud-based banking and payment solution designed specifically for SMBs. Backing the startup in its mission to create an easy payment solution for small businesses is a cool $1.5 million in seed funding, raised from .406 Ventures, which has enabled MineralTree to develop its payments solution and make its initial hires, partnerships, and customer acquisitions. The most notable of which is the startup’s partnership with Silicon Valley Bank in Santa Clara, California — the first financial institution to implement MineralTree’s solution and offer it to its SMB customers. So, MineralTree is off to a good start, but you might be wondering why the world needs another payment solution, and why partnering with the big, bad banks is going to ingratiate MineralTree to your ranks. Well, the thing is that there are all kinds of laws and protections in place for your average, everyday consumer to protect them from fraud and those punks who love to steal personal information from your browser. On the flip side, enterprises and big businesses have the cash to invest in more sophisticated payment systems (i.e. ERP software) to secure their payments. But, for the 2.5 million SMBs in the U.S. — those with annual revenue between $500,000 and $50 million — the options aren’t so stellar.  Most SMBs use ad hoc processes that are manual, paper-based and therefore inefficient and inherently less secure. What’s more, controls, oversight and approvals can be time-consuming and a pain in the ass. In terms of security, for consumer accounts, individuals have 60 days to notify their bank of unauthorized transactions (in the case of fraudulent activity), whereas business account holders have only one business day to report the attack — after that, the bank is no longer liable. In one case, MineralTree Founder and CEO BC Krishna said, a small business saw millions of dollars worth of fraudulent withdrawals, yet even after following their bank’s instructions for reporting the attack, they were found liable and were not reimbursed. This kind of problem, in 2011, is unacceptable, so Krishna and company devised a solution that is layered over existing accounting applications and integrates directly with the bank’s payment systems without making changes to either. MineralTree’s Accounting Manager app is a web-based add-on to the SMB’s existing accounting system that businesses can use to manage payables, including entering payment information, associate payments with backup documents, along with the ability to prioritize, recommend and submit payments to the CFO or business owner for approval.  The startup then provides a separate “CFO App” that lets the financial officer, or the executive in charge, to approve and release payments. Both accounting manager and CFO apps are available on the iPad or via a secure web app. In turn, the bank used by the SMB gets a third web-based app that enables the financial institution to manage its MineralTree users. Each of the three apps are linked to the startup’s payment server, which coordinates and manages all payment functions in the system, between customers, the bank, and payment service providers, etc. While it may sound like there are a lot of moving parts, in reality, the MineralTree solution provides an all-in-one, universal platform for all the payment channels an SMB or bank uses, whether it be check, ACH, wire, payment cards, PayPal, or mobile banking.  The SMB does not pay MineralTree anything to use its system, instead MineralTree monetizes through its partnerships with banks, allowing the bank to choose at what price it will offer MineralTree’s apps to its SMB customers. Though Krishna said, on average, the cost will work itself out to approximately $75 a month. Considering the solution applies modern electronic document-management technologies to eliminate paper trails and a simple, auditable workflow, as well as reduced risk of fraud by automatically matching bank statements with general ledger entries, and increased security — it seems like a small price to pay for the ROI. What’s more, banks and financial institutions are not particularly happy with being disintermediated, and PayPal is a good example of this. Merchant receiving has, by and large, been taken over by PayPal — a third party service not controlled by banks. However, MineralTree is focused on business sending, and its solution inherently allows banks to retain control over this process, while making money by offering the startup’s enhanced functionality to their business clients. That revenue stream should be enough of a value proposition for banks to get on board. Unfortunately, though, for those SMBs who want to take advantage of the service, they’ll have to wait until their bank signs on board — there’s currently no workaround option for SMBs. But Krishna said the team is working fast and furiously to convince banks to adopt so that small businesses won’t have to worry for long about this hurdle. MineralTree’s payments platform is definitely niche, but for the 2.5 million SMBs currently operating in the U.S., this has the potential to solve a lot of problems inherent to the paper-based and snail-slow payment, approval, and accounting processes many are currently working with. It will be interesting to see if the team can convince the big banks that this is a workable solution for their SMB clients. For more, check out MineralTree at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Tinkercad, a startup that aims to introduce browser-based 3D printing CAD to the masses, has landed $1M in seed funding from True Ventures, Jaiku founder Jyri Engestrom, Delicious founder Joschua Schachter, Eghosa Omogui and Taher Haveliwala. The company’s mission is to ‘reach and teach’ a wide audience on the use of CAD software and creating ‘fun and meaningful’ things like jewelry, toys, car parts and whatnot, using 3D printers. Kai Backman, Tinkercad’s co-founder and CEO, explains that one only needs a browser and a couple of minutes to use its browser-based software and have a 3D project ready for printing.  “We use game-like quests to teach what we call ‘design literacy’, understanding the design of physical things. By lowering the barrier of entry, our users have been able to create and print a wide variety of awesome items”, he adds. Tinkercad is free, and encourages sharing designs under a creative commons license. Once users create designs with the software, which seems pretty easy to use based on my rudimentary testing, they can order designs directly from printing services like Shapeways and i.Materialise or download STL files to use other printing services or personal 3D printers like Makerbot’s Thing-O-Matic. If you’re into this kind of stuff, check Tinkercad out, and I would also urge you to also visit GrabCAD.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Any casual observer, male or female, knows that social networking has taken off not just because it’s a good idea but because more than 50% of the population – i.e. not just men – have found it appealing. Geeky guys might have enjoyed Alt. groups back in the day, but online interaction went truly mainstream when women got involved. So it is that Luluvise has hit on a clever formula. It’s realised than too many of the platforms are designed by men. So this is a social and communications platform aimed at young women and their best friends where they can hand pick their best pals and network privately. Unsurprisingly, the company’s aims to re-create the patterns of close female friendship online. Thus it has raised $1 million in equity financing from Passion Capital, PROfounders Capital, and prominent angel investor Alexios Vratskides (founder/CEO of Upstream). The Luluvise platform streamlines “girl time” activities – talking, sharing, gossiping, and shopping – by aggregating email, SMS, instant messages and comms in one secure place. Think unified messaging for young women, maybe. The target market is young women aged 18-35 around the world. Luluvise will be accessible online as well as via an iPhone and web app. Sure, Facebook and Google+ could be used, as could Girlsguideto, but none have the express design for this purpose. Makes sense. According to some industry figures women generate more than 70% of the messaging activity on Facebook, spend more than 35% more time on social networks than men, and drive 80% of all consumer spending. The startup was founded in 2010 by Alexandra Chong (pictured), a former Global Head of Marketing & PR for Upstream and Director at the Corporate Executive Board. The team is 10-20 people, based in London, but the company is incorporated in the US.  Chong was inspired to create the company after wanting to share a private Valentine’s Day story with her girlfriends but ended up having to make three phone calls, seven text messages and two Skype calls just to get the story out. What she needed was a private space online to share it just the once. The target launch date is mid-November. Users can sign up for now. It’s likely there will be affiliate programs and e-commerce opportunities amongst others. Chong herself has plenty to talk with her friends about. She’s a member of the Ladies First team at Queens Tennis Club in London, and previously represented Team Jamaica in the Federation Cup and Commonwealth Games (tennis). Latest headlines delivered to you daily ToutApp was part of 500 Startups’ summer batch of little monsters and launched this June with $350,000 in funding from Esther Dyson, Eric Ries, Daniel Eskapa, NYC Seed Fund, Joshua Baer, and more. Why? Well, ToutApp has an intriguing value proposition for all those that send a large number of outbound emails that have similar content. For PR reps looking to hawk their companies, or entrepreneurs looking to pitch to journalists or investors, ToutApp looks to turn those repetitive and often copy-and-pasted emails into templates that can be personalized with a few clicks.  Beginning today, Tout officially integrates with users’ Gmail accounts to parse through emails to identify the most commonly-sent mass emails. The tool then creates a dynamic template for that email chain, allowing users to autofill the name, company, or location as they write their emails. Users can also take advantage of auto-CC and BCC, or even auto-attach files permanently to a template, without leaving the comfort of their email client. But here’s the kicker: Emails sent using ToutApp can be tracked both for views and clickthroughs, so that you know when the recipient of the email has opened it and is planning a response. Of course, if you so choose, if a user sees that the email has been opened but not responded to within a few hours, one could even send a follow-up canned response using another one of Tout’s templates. This has the potential for creepiness, but it’s also a great way to save time and get the ball rolling on those high priority conversations. What’s more, to boost its relevance as an enterprise productivity application, ToutApp offers integration directly with your most-trusted CRMs, like Salesforce, Highrise, Batchbook, and Capsule. With Tout’s Salesforce integration, for example, users can quickly send and respond to emails using its templates, along with easily creating and sharing those templates with your team and accessing email analytics across your business to see which kind of messaging is working for your salesforce — and which is just eliciting the sound of crickets. And with the ability to track views and clicks, teams can take the guesswork out of their email outreach with that realtime visibility into where emails currently stand in the review and response process. Tout is also officially launching their iOS apps today, which will let users send and customize their Tout emails and templates from their mobile phones, even scheduling delivery of emails for a later date. Check out Tout’s iPhone app here.  And for more on ToutApp’s Gmail integration, look out, video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in May, Avado was chosen as a finalist at TechCrunch Disrupt in NYC. The startup’s ambition was, said in reductive terms, to become the Salesforce.com of personal health records. (You can read our initial coverage here.) In other words, like Salesforce’s “customer relationship management” (CRM), Avado is building a “patient relationship management” (PRM) platform in an attempt to create a more fluid and communicative relationship between patients and doctors — by way of connected health records.  The future of medical practice, Avado CEO Dave Chase says, is very clear: “It’s about being accountable and patient-centric”. The old model for care providers was do more and bill more, but today those who pay for health care, from private insurance and government to consumers themselves want to pay when their health goals are achieved — today it’s about patient satisfaction. Thus, core to Avado’s value proposition is that, through richer and more frequent communication, patients are far more likely to stay healthy and actualize the steps set forth in a care regimen prescribed by doctors.  Since Disrupt, Avado has been working on building out that robust (and freemium-modeled) communication platform for care providers and their patients, and, today, Avado is officially coming out of beta to launch its service to the public. With this full-scale launch comes a number of free products that make up the basis of its freemium platform, all of which are geared towards facilitating that more active communication. For starters, Avado is launching a secure, HIPAA compliant messaging service that patients and healthcare providers can use to safely communicate without violating HIPAA. Avado’s platform will also include a broadcast publishing engine, that Chase likens to Yammer, in that it functions as a tool that allows healthcare providers to publish content to a targeted group, like fellow staffers, or more broadly, to their public website or Twitter and Facebook, for example. The practice can also choose to publish to groups of patients, like female patients over 18 years old, or those with Diabetes, and so on.  What’s more, with its “Live and Interactive in 55” program, Avado will provide practices with an interactive website that includes secure messaging, a private social network, and patient portal that can be up and running within 55 minutes of sign up. Chase said that, with no cost and minimal time involved for practices, these healthcare providers no longer have an excuse to offer an abysmal website and user experience. With a workable website and electronic medical records, practices will already be well on their way to becoming more patient-centric, interactive, and, well, modern. Avado will enable practices to claim their accounts in Avado’s namespace, where, Chase says, there will only be one “drjohnson.avado.com”, for example, and unlike domain names on the web, Avado won’t allow squatters, and namespaces need to be kept active, or it will be released back into the wild.  While the above are free features Avado clients will be able to take advantage of for free, the startup will be charging $100 per month per clinician.   As to how Avado is working for businesses, Dr. Samir Qamar, the founder and CEO of Medlion, a group of doctors in Silicon Valley providing cheap primary care to uninsured and insured patients alike, says that the company has been in the process of licensing its model to doctors all over the country.  But, to do so, it needed a software platform that combined the tools of an insurance-based practice (like the generation of ICD-9 codes for creation of super bills) with those of a direct primary care practice (a system that allows for secure patient-to-practice interaction). Qamar also said that they wanted a system that implemented scheduling and electronic medical charting to save on overhead and everything in between.  For businesses like Medlion and Organic Medicine Now (two of the startup’s early customers), Avado offers a pretty handy solution. For practices, having the ability to customize a cloud-based software package around their specific criteria is huge — it’s a big time and money saver, and therein lies Avado’s value proposition. Aggregating data including past and future appointements, lab results, immunizations, surgeries, etc., along with allowing you the consumer to enter your own data, manually or by way of health gadgets? Pretty cool. For more on Avado, check them out at home here. Dave Chase, Avado’s CEO, is a former a 12-year employee at Microsoft, where he played a key role in founding Microsoft’s healthcare business. He then went on to act as a senior consultant at Accenture’s Healthcare Practice, working with more than two dozen healthcare providers and systems. Chase has become a spokesman for best practices for healthtech companies, and you can read his guest contributions to TechCrunch here, where he describes both Avado and the problems facing the healthcare industry in more depth.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Social gaming startup Mention Mobile has raised $250,000 from billionaire, entrepreneur and Dallas Mavericks owner Mark Cuban in exchange for a minority equity stake in the company. Mention Mobile says it specializes in apps that are ‘infused with Facebook content’, and the capital injection is meant to fund the development of new single-title apps. The company’s mobile applications are interesting in that they leverage public information from Facebook to customize games and create personalized content based off a user’s friends, preferences, interests and whatnot.  Mention Mobile’s apps are currently available only for iOS, but the company says upcoming apps will also be available for Android. Founded in 2010, Mention Mobile is based in Los Angeles. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Strangeloop, the provider of web content optimization solutions and enterprise applications, today announced that it has raised $10 million in series B funding from a private investment group. Though Strangeloop wasn’t saying who this private investment group is, we’ve learned that the investment was made by a group of “Canadian super angels”. (Which sounds like a top flight hockey team. We’ll update when we learn more). According to Strangeloop CEO Jonathan Bixby, the startup’s new infusion of capital will be used to develop new products and features as well as to expand its global reach into Europe, Latin America, and Asia. The new round builds on the company’s $11.5 million series A, which it raised back in July 2007, bringing total investment to north of $22 million. For those unfamiliar, the Vancouver-based company was founded in 2006 with the goal of creating a “magic box” of website performance best practices to make websites faster. Or, put another way, the company wanted to build a workable platform that would offer superior front-end optimization via the cloud. It began with its flagship desktop product, “Site Optimizer”, which allows website owners to quickly increase the load times of their sites.  How? By taking HTML (one of the front-end languages of choice for your website and browser) that has already been optimized for readability, supportability, etc., and retaining these benefits, and focusing on offering speedier page rendering by implementing a number of tweaks to object names, reordering when and how objects are rendered, how scripts are executed, and so on — optimizing all of this content for the specific browser its customers are using. And so far it’s been working. Strangeloop has already seen companies like eBay, Visa, Petco, and Travelocity sign on as customers, thanks to what the company reports as speed improvements of up to 300 percent, conversion rates as high as 12 percent, and revenue increases of up to 52 percent. And, as one might guess from its customers, Strangeloop is targeting eCommerce companies, specifically, to enable these platforms to better retain their customers through faster load times — through a virtual appliance and through the cloud. And while fast load times are important to every website on the Web (with some exceptions), high-trafficked eCommerce platforms have a bit more at stake than my fantasy baseball blog. According to Bixby, shoppers today expect commerce websites to load in 2 seconds or less. With such demands, each second lost in load time can equate to another lost consumer.  Strangeloop also recently took the logical next step from website optimization to mobile, launching its “Mobile Site Optimizer” to accelerate websites for mobile devices. But, according to Strangeloop, it’s not just a technology port, as it offers proprietary, mobile specific features (like Mobile SuperCache, Touch Event Conversion, and Dynamic Payload Decision Making) to leverage standards and protocols like HTML5 and Google’s SPDY.  The real value proposition for site performance optimizers like Strangeloop is that they turn traditional content optimization (which can be a complex, time consuming operation) into an automated process that happens in realtime — at the direction of an intelligent appliance. Of course, it’s all about the results. Web content optimizers fly or die based on whether or not they can deliver the goods. Strangeloop has been making some great headway, but it’s got some competition from other awesome performance and security optimizers like Yottaa and CloudFlare. Both worthy startup competitors. Check it out and let us know what you think. More on Strangeloop here, and why the company is called “Strangeloop” here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation has pledged $250,000 to the Startup Weekend EDU series of events, the dedicated education-focused vertical within the non-profit. The Startup Weekend organization, which is supported by the Kauffman Foundation and the social learning startup Grockit, offers intense 54-hour events where entrepreneurs come together to share ideas, form teams, build products and launch startups. The EDU vertical within Startup Weekend was officially launched in September, and kicked off its launch with events in Seattle, San Francisco and Washington D.C. over the past month. This month, Startup Weekend will host its next EDU event in London from November 25th-27th. The organization will soon announce more events that will be taking place worldwide over the next 12 months. “Given its dedication to education reform and extensive networks in the space, the Gates Foundation is the ideal partner for us to scale the Startup Weekend EDU initiative,” said Farb Nivi, founder of Grockit about the grant from the Gates Foundation. To register for the London Startup Weekend EDU event, head over to edu.startupweekend.org. Latest headlines delivered to you daily ElectNext, a graduate from DreamIt Ventures’ Fall 2011 class, is launching out of beta today to match voters with the political candidates that best reflect their values. The site, which likes to describe itself as an “eHarmony for voters,” offers a familiar concept, thanks to the dozens of politically themed quizzes that attempt to suss out what political party best fits your personal interests and beliefs. But ElectNext takes the political quiz to the next level by actually matching up your beliefs with those from the actual candidates in the current election. To get started, you have to first sign up for the site, or connect using your Facebook or Twitter accounts. Instead of beginning with a quiz, you’re sent to a page where you can organize and rank the issues that are important to you, like immigration, healthcare, abortion, gun control, education, gay rights, the economy, energy, the environment, foreign policy, national security and taxes. Ranking is easy to do – you just click on the issue’s name and it appears on a list on the right side of the page.  The quiz then follows, requiring you to answer at least 6 questions in order to get candidate suggestions. Of course, the more questions you answer, the better the results. The only problem with the quiz is that it assumes you have an ongoing knowledge of current politics, events, military actions, treaties and the like, as the included “learn more” links didn’t provide any additional information on the topic. This is because the “learn more” section relies on crowd-sourcing, asking ElectNext users to submit the “Pros” and “Cons” on each issue. As the service is just now launching, all the sections I came across in tests were still blank. It would have been nice if the founders had at least seeded some of these questions with details prior to launch, since – let’s face it – the people who don’t know who to vote for are probably the same ones who need a little help understanding the issues, too.  Upon completing the quiz, you’re shown which federal candidates match your views and, if you enter your zip code, you’re also shown the senators and U.S. representatives that are your best picks. For more details on the results, you can click the “see why” button beneath each candidate to learn more about why that candidate is being recommended. Results can be shared via Facebook, Twitter and email, too. The candidate matches in my tests seemed to be fairly accurate, although I didn’t really need a website to tell me which way I was going to vote – I already knew. For the “on the fence” voter, though, something like this may help them make their final choice, especially given the site’s ease-of-use. ElectNext was founded by Penn Wharton and graduate students Keya Dannenbaum and Paul Jungwirth, who sourced the questions from a bipartisan group of experts, including Ivy League professors from Harvard, Penn and Princeton. The service is live now, but will be officially celebrating its launch on Tuesday as a featured presenter at Tedx Philly, followed by a launch party at National Mechanics in Old City, Philadelphia at 8 PM tomorrow night. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Vacation homes sit empty most of the year, representing a huge amount of untapped inventory waiting to be discovered online.  Large services such as HomeAway, VRBO, and TripAdvisor’s FlipKey are taking advantage of this market opportunity, but for many vacation homeowners managing their listings online is still too much of a hassle. They end up handing over the keys to local rental property managers instead or not even listing their properties.  A new startup in Denver called Evolve Vacation Rental takes more of a white-glove approach to marketing vacation homes online. Evolve starts with a phone consultation with each homeowner, gathers the property information and photos, and then lists it across various vacation rental websites, including HomeAway, VRBO, and FlipKey, as well as its own site.  The homeowners do not have to pay for any of the listings (which they would if they listed on their own).  Evolve takes all the risk  and if it rents out the property, it tales a 10 percent fee. In addition to pushing the listings out to as many vacation rental websites as makes sense, Evolve makes sure the copy reads well and is SEO-friendly, responds promptly to any inquiries, takes payment, and eliminates faxing with online rental agreements.  It doesn’t provide on-the ground services such as house cleaning or maintenance, but will help homeowners contract those out.  Evolve focuses on the online marketing, and even tests out different versions of the listings using A/B split testing.  (For instance, here is a listing for a condo in Santa Barbara).  Very few vacation homeowners have the time or inclination to do all of this by themselves. Founders Brian Egan and Adam Sherry were early employees of Denver-based Exclusive Resorts, which is backed by Steve Case and focuses on higher end properties and a country club membership model. With Evolve, Egan and Sherry are seeking to make the process of listing and marketing any vacation home simpler and more efficient.  The startup closed a $530,000 seed round last May from angel investors including Kevin Willer, Andrew Houser, and John Anderson.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today we take some time to dive into Clipboard, an intriguing new Web clipping and social bookmarking service started recently by Gary Flake, a former Overture executive who went on to found both Yahoo’s Research Labs and Microsoft’s Live Labs. We’ve also learned the names of the fledgling company’s many, top notch investors. Clipboard aims to become the go-to service for saving and sharing the relevant parts of any page or service available on the Web, including much of its core functionality, or put differently taking care of everything in between simply bookmarking a URL and having to save an entire Web page. Using a bookmarklet, Clipboard users can ‘clip’ things like search query results, stock quotes, tweets or Facebook status updates, video clips, images with captions, a Google Maps map, a forum answer, an Amazon book review, an eBay product summary, a digital coupon, and the likes.  Select part of a Web page or service, and use your mouse (simply by hovering over something or, preferably, by using the scroll wheel) to increase or decrease the number of ‘zones’ you would like to clip. Your selection – including links and images etc. – will be saved to your Clipboard profile instantly, and you can jump straight to it to visit your clip collection. Difficult to make it any easier. Check out Flake’s public clips to get a better idea of what Clipboard can do. A screenshot of mine:  Clips can be annotated, saved, shared publicly and with specific users, tagged and all that jazz. But you can also just bookmark simple services you use, games you play, or parts of Web pages you often visit, and interact with your clips by visiting just one website instead of all them separately. Having tested the service extensively over the past week, I’ve run into some of its limitations, and some bugs which have since been squashed. Not all of a site’s functionality can be simply clipped to Clipboard, as you will notice, but that’s of course not necessarily their fault. Inevitably, some services that reside on other websites or rely on third-party API calls or whatever, will be tougher to clip in full.  For basic things like saving search results, Web videos, simple Flash games, Wolfram Alpha results, online coupons and so on, Clipboard works like a charm most of the time though. It’s addictive, too. Don’t take my word for it. You can visit this promo page to gain early access to Clipboard. Note that this link will only work when you click on it from the TechCrunch website. Or check out similar services like Snip.it, Snipi, the new Delicious or Pinterest. Oh, and about the company’s backers. TechCrunch has learned that Clipboard has raised an undisclosed amount of financing from the following, impressive list of investors: – Andreessen Horowitz– Index Ventures– CrunchFund (note: TechCrunch founder Michael Arrington is a founding partner)– DFJ– SV Angel / Ron Conway– Betaworks– First Round Capital– CODE Advisors– Founder’s Co-Op– Acequia Capital– Vast Ventures– Ted Meisel (former CEO of Overture and now at Elevation Partners)– Blake Krikorian (former CEO of Sling and now an Amazon board member)– the elusive Vivi Nevo Clipboard is expected to debut its service in public beta in the coming months (again, TechCrunch readers can get early access to the current version of Clipboard right here). Alternatively, you watch the video below to get an idea of how Clipboard works. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Luxury car-sharing service HiGear is announcing a new product called “Swap Club,” which will allow its existing car owners the opportunity to swap cars among each other in exchange for HiGear points. To participate in the “Swap Club,” vehicle owners will either need to accumulate points by renting out their cars on HiGear or they can optionally purchase points via HiGear’s website. Now live in the Bay Area and L.A., HiGear differentiates itself from car-sharing competitors like RelayRides, Getaround, Zipcar and others, by specializing in “high-end” luxury vehicles only, like Mercedes, BMW, Audi, Porsche, Aston Martin, Lamborghini and Tesla. The company will begin to roll out its new “Swap Club” service to select members next week for testing purposes, says CEO Ali Moiz. The feature should serve as an added incentive for vehicle owners to rent out their own cars on HiGear, as doing so means more points that can be used towards swaps – swaps which, given enough points, will be free. The number of points a vehicle owner is awarded depends on the type of car and the rental length. A BMW 3 Series may go for 40 points per day, for example, while an Aston Martin DB9 could be 140 points per day. “Our vision is to bring down the cost of access to awesome cars, and the new ‘Swap Club’ will create the world’s first luxury car-swap program that gets you into a sports car starting at $0,” says Moiz. “If you’re into cars, this is godsend.” HiGear has now logged over 25,000 hours of car shares on its service since its beta launch in August. Over 2,000 of those hours were in L.A., where HiGear arrived just a week ago. If the current growth rate continues, Moiz says he expects to see 40,000 to 50,000 hours over the next 90 days. The company also plans to launch in five additional markets, including Portland and San Diego, by year-end. HiGear has raised $1.3 million in seed funding from BV Capital, Battery Ventures, 500 Startups and angels including Zipcar investor Craig Sherman and Kevin Chou. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Aksel Group, the company behind AkselParis.com, a direct-to-consumer online men’s fashion store, announced this week that it has raised $500,000 in seed funding. The round was led by Inspiration Ventures, with participation from Dave McClure’s 500 Startups, Fabrice Grinda, the founder of OLX, IG Expansion’s Jose Marin, Paul Bragiel of I/O Ventures, and French entrepreneur Nicolas Bernadi. So what is it about this men’s fashion company that has investors revved up about its prospects? Well, it’s a bit like J. Hilburn, in that it seeks to cut out the middle man (and the mark-up) by selling direct to consumer. Oh, and it’s got a European twist. The San Francisco-based Aksel sells luxury fashion, like shirts, socks, footwear (along with accessories like iPad covers), at affordable prices, all of which are made in Europe. In the next few weeks, Aksel will be rolling out outerwear and scarves, and it will be using its new round of funding to expand its line, with an emphasis on distributing European brands that don’t have a presence in the U.S. The company plans to offer 20 brands by the end of the year. Selling luxury clothes direct-to-consumer online allows the company offer product at 30 to 50 percent discounts, says Aksel Founder and CEO Yazid Aksas. By cutting out the stores’ commissions, in the same way Dell does, for example, the company can offer merchandise that outpaces those found at department stores, but is on par in terms of affordability.  Another bonus? The shipping (within the U.S.) is free. So far, the CEO says, the brand has built a loyal following among young professionals because of a unique loyalty approach: Aksel names its shirts after its most loyal customers, who in turn become brand advocates. Aksel is hoping that by offering a European-influenced brand, tailored for the U.S. market it can offer clothes that have the look of fashion but also address the less formal, tie-less culture that has become popular in the U.S. The company wants to be a one-stop shop for men’s fashion, distributing brands that have gained traction in Europe but have little recognition in the U.S. There are many mid-size brands in Europe, the CEO says, that have zero presence in the U.S. because of the pain they have to go through to reach American consumers. So, with Aksel, he wants to give those brands an easy way to distribute their merchandise in the U.S. But Aksel won’t be the kind of online clothing outlet that consists of $5,000 coats, the Frenchman says, the focus will be on clothes that not only look good, but are casual, and affordable.  For more, check out Aksel at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, it’s been an interesting last few weeks for Urban Airship, the startup that aims to give developers a simple way to build in-app purchases and push notifications into their mobile apps.  A week ago, Urban Airship acquired Matt Galligan and Joe Stump’s SimpleGeo (the news was broken by TechCrunch Founder Mike Arrington), and today the startup has announced that it raised $15 million in series C financing from new strategic investors Verizon and Salesforce.com. Existing investors True Ventures and Foundry Group also participated in the cash round, bringing Urban Airship’s total funding to $26.1 million. With the acquisition of SimpleGeo, Portland-based Urban Airship boosts its team to 51 and is now has a presence in the Bay Area. Not only that, but with SimpleGeo once being touted as the “Amazon Web Services” for location-based products, allowing developers to build location into their web and mobile apps and offering the infrastructure to back that up, Urban Airship can now round out its suite of offerings for mobile developers. SimpleGeo’s assets will allow Urban airship to give its customers, which include ESPN, LivingSocial, and Gowalla the ability to more easily target their users with push notifications, as knowing where they are when they’re using their mobile apps is a huge piece to the puzzle. Urban Airship is already facilitating over 1 billion notifications per month to users on 300 million devices, and the company has seen a huge boost thanks to the recent launch of Apple’s iOS 5, which has much-improved push notification functionality. With the launch of iOS 5, Urban Airship has seen calls to its API increase tenfold, according to CEO Scott Kveton. What’s more, the startup has seen its revenue increase 600 percent in 2011, as developers are building its tools and services into tens of thousands of mobile apps and using its back-end platform to power in-app communications with their customers. According to Arrington, while the the $15.1 million series C round Urban Airship raised today was all in cash, the acquisition of SimpleGeo came in the form of stock, as a part of the larger round of financing. As SimpleGeo CEO Jay Adelson told Arrington (Adelson is now an advisor to Urban Airship), while his company considered both selling the company and raising a new round of company, a merger seemed the best way to go. Clearly, SimpleGeo’s investors, and those on the management team at SimpleGeo were excited by Urban Airship’s prospects going forward. And in this case, considering their strengths, this move seems to make a great deal of sense, strategically. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Brenden Mulligan is an entrepreneur who created Onesheet, ArtistData, MorningPics, and PhotoPile. He’s an mentor for 500 Startups, Advise.me and several startups. You can find him on Twitter at @bmull and blogging at Starting Up. For the past few months, my wife and I have been traveling and meeting startups around the world. We’ve met entrepreneurs in Tokyo, Thailand, India, Israel, and Istanbul. In the next week we’ll be meeting with a community leader in South Africa. It’s been fascinating. In addition to meeting with the teams, we have been leading Q&A sessions with larger groups. The discussion always includes the group asking “how do we make our startup community as strong as Silicon Valley?” It’s an important question, as a lot of the startups’ success in Silicon Valley can be attributed to the strong community. However, that community has been growing and maturing for over 40 years. So when people ask about how to replicate it, I try to direct the conversation back to the foundation of the community. These are the elements I think are important to seed a startup community: There are a lot of places where starting a company isn’t seen as an exciting and inspiring pursuit. In fact, in places like Japan, we learned that becoming an entrepreneur is seen as an unwise and ill-informed decision. This kind of environment makes launching a startup, which is already an incredibly difficult task, near impossible. The founders needs to find a way to feel supported. If they don’t feel support, they won’t make it through endless 18 hour days. In places where support isn’t the norm, founders need to find ways to support each other until the rest of the community comes around. One of the best things about having co-founders is it gives an entrepreneur other people to bounce ideas off of and work through problems with. But in good startup communities, this kind of collaboration isn’t limited to internal conversations. Founders of different companies should constantly get together to share their experiences and help each other. Especially in newer entrepreneurial communities, it’s incredibly important to pool knowledge, instead of everyone figuring out everything on their own. This can happen in any form, whether it’s late night hack sessions or weekly breakfasts. Figure out what works for your community and then get together and talk. When collaborating, transparency is a must. In many places, people are afraid to talk freely about their ideas, figuring that someone might steal what they’re working on. In more mature startup environments, we’ve learned that this shouldn’t be a concern. The risk of someone stealing your idea (which I’ve never seen happen) is almost always offset by the huge amount of value you get from sharing what you’re working on and asking for feedback. So when you get together to talk, really talk. It’s human nature to talk about your successes and hide your failures. After all, why tell people what you’re not good at? Why admit you didn’t do something well? In startup communities, it’s one of the most valuable things you can do. Most entrepreneurs (and people in general) will tell you they’ve learned more from their failures than their successes. By keeping these failures to yourself, no one else can learn from them. In startups, people don’t see failure as a reflection of your talent, they see it as an opportunity to learn and improve. Most startups fail. So if you’re going to get into startups, embrace failure, and learn from it. Then share what you learned. Getting a group of entrepreneurs talking is a great step, but finding some common places to do that makes it a lot more powerful. This be a permanent location (co-working space, incubators, technology organizations, cafes) or a scheduled event (meetups, happy hours), but it’s important to establish places where entrepreneurs can co-exist. There are probably a lot more entrepreneurs around you than you think, and getting everyone together is one way to understand the size of your community. This is one of the reasons that Startup Weekend is such a powerful organization. It brings the community together. People from more established entrepreneurial cities love helping smaller communities grow. Use this to your advantage. Invite people who have been successful in established hubs to come speak at a local conference, come speak at the local hub, or just come and meet teams when they’re in town. Pay attention to people’s travel schedules (which people always post to Twitter) and if they’re in your area, invite them. Entrepreneurs love sharing knowledge with someone else, and it’s rewarding to do this with a new community. Dave McClure has formed a whole organization around this concept with Geeks On A Plane, which takes entrepreneurs to all corners of the world to teach and learn from the local startup community. Jeff Slobotski has done it for years with the enormously successful Big Omaha conference. You community can’t expect everyone to come to you or to figure it all out on its own. It’s important to see how people are doing it elsewhere, and there’s no better way to do that than to get knee deep in it. I don’t think I’ve ever spoken with an entrepreneur who took a trip to the bay area who left without learning something new or meeting at least one valuable connection. So use whatever connections you have and visit places with mature communities like San Francisco, New York, etc. If you can’t make it, send ambassadors for you to go learn and then come share back with the community. A lot of people worry that since top tier investors aren’t interested in their community right away, their efforts aren’t paying off. But they need to be patient. Building a startup community takes a long time. Brad Feld of the Foundry Group spoke about this at last year’s Tahoe Tech Talk, saying it’s taken 15 years to build the community in Boulder, Colorado, even though many people think it’s happened just over the past few years. Overall, just understand that the most amazing thing about Silicon Valley isn’t the huge amount of venture capital, or number potential acquirers. It’s not all the incubators or co-working spaces. Instead, it’s the collaborative, helpful, and inspiring community that’s developed around it all. It’s the 10 other entrepreneurs sitting next to you at the coffee shop willing to help you through a problem or make an introduction to someone who might be helpful. It’s the support that the entire community consistently gives each other. A strong community won’t appear overnight, but if you start with the right foundation, the rest will come in time. Please add anything I missed in the comments. [Update: A video of Brad’s talk] Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDropbox Drew Houston Looking AheadBy any measure Drew Houston and his Dropbox team are having a hugely successful run. In Houston’s final Founder Stories episode with TechCrunch editor, Erick Schonfeld, Houston says he plans to maintain this momentum by focusing on mobile, and just about everything else. Houston says Dropbox has secured a new agreement with HTC, where it “is going to be baked into tens-of-millions of [Android] phones” and like Facebook, Dropbox plans to stamp its product on everything. “In 18-months you are going to see little Dropbox buttons everywhere.” But will Dropbox’s strategy be strong enough to fend off popular sites like Instagram and Twitter, which also store digital content submitted by large user communities? Or put more bluntly “five years from now, will I even need Dropbox?” asks Schonfeld. Houston believes the answer to both questions is yes. “We can help you get stuff out of each of those little silos or little boxes and put them all in one place so that all that content can be more useful to you and we can help you share it and we can help you see it on your iPad or see it on your TV.” We’ll see how it all plays out. Until then, make sure to watch episodes I, II and III of Schonfeld’s interview with Houston. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring Eric Ries, Julia Hartz and Christopher Poole are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A year ago, at BlogWorld Expo in Las Vegas, PageLines announced the release of Platform, a drag and drop design framework for WordPress. The product offered some cool CMS design options, a drag-and-drop layout editor, and a fully configurable template builder for creating custom websites. PageLines’ Platform has since been downloaded 400,000 times and has become one of the most popular frameworks on WordPress.org over the last year. Back at BlogWorld Expo today, PageLines announced today that it will launch version 2.0 of its framework on December 8th, which will include a nifty new marketplace: The PageLines Store. For developers, designers, or people who want to build cool websites without worrying about coding, this should be of interest. The store is basically an app store for “drag & drop” sections, plug-ins, sections, and themes — all of which have been built by developers for the PageLines community. Apps in the store will range from drag and drop sections that customize the style of a website to an integrated system for eCommerce or a community forum and other functionality.  For developers, the PageLines Store offers the opportunity to get exposure to several hundred thousand users, while taking a 70 percent cut of every sale. And developers get to set the price.  The startup is also announcing the PageLines Developer Community, Workshops and LeContest, which will all be “focused around educating and helping designers and developers become successful with PageLines”, according to the startup’s blog post. In terms of the contest, all developers have to do is build a cool plug-in, drag & drop feature, etc., and PageLines will select a few of the best entries to launch at LeWeb ’11 in Paris this December. For more info, check the contest out here.  As for PageLines v2.0, the new framework will include an improved layout editor, an intuitive UI, responsive design, dynamic color handling, and improved performance, says PageLines CEO Andrew Powers. The new framework will be sold via PageLines’ website, and the cost for a regular license will be $197. The developer version, which will include integrations for Mediawiki and Vanilla forum software, will be available for $397.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily If rap lyrics like “Real G’s move in silence like lasagna” stump you, check out Rap Genius. The crowdsourced hip-hop lyrics explanation site will inform you that Lil Wayne is describing how skilled gangsters can assassinate someone without making a sound, like the letter ‘g’ in ‘lasagna’. But the three-man team behind Rap Genius aren’t satisfied with their current vertical. Today they told me they’re preparing to launch a site for rock music lyrics called Stereo IQ, and one day hope to expand to sites for country music, poetry, legal documents, and religious texts. While presently focused on user growth, the network of sites could monetize through sponsorships of brands mentioned in or related to the explained texts. Rap Genius Co-Founder Mahbod Moghadam tells me “Google wants to index all of text. But what’s more interesting is to try to explain all of text, anything that lends itself to line-by-line analysis.” While a lofty ambition, the bootstrapped startup site is off to a good start, receiving several million unique visitors a month. There’s plenty of runway in the industry, as Mogahadam says 2% of all Google searches are for lyrics. Dozens of lyrics sites now exist, but most are plagued with inaccuracies and awful user experiences cluttered with intrusive ads. This includes frontrunner MetroLyrics, which as of a few years ago had 13.5 million uniques a month and $10 million a year in revenue. Mogahadam and his co-founders were inspired by VH1’s Pop-Up Video, initially writing all the site’s explanations themselves. Eventually it opened up to contributors using a Wikipedia-style peer review system. Mogahadam says, “I had all this paranoia that the crowdsourced explanations were gonna be shit, but if you have a strong hierarchy of reviewers, crowdsourced content can be even better than using professionals.”  Soon people started adding explanations to all sorts of text, not just rap lyrics. The site now features the Bill of Rights, excerpts from the Bible, rock songs, and poetry by Emily Dickinson. Currently, all this is hosted on Rap Genius but Mogahadam wants to launch standalone sites where tight knit communities can gather around specific content. When asked about Quora, which sometimes receives questions on lyric meanings, Mogahadam says “Mad respect for the guys who started it, but I think it’s too big — trying to do all of knowledge in one site. If you look at answers in areas other than technology, they’re not as good.” He says he’s willing to forgo the SEO benefits of a single site in favor of creating destinations that enthusiasts of particular verticals will keep coming back to for the latest explanations. For monetization, Rap Genius currently offers branded merchandise that doubles as promotion, and is reluctant to sell ads. I told the company I think it’s best bet is to get brands that are name-dropped in their lyrics or explanations to buy for sponsorships or site take-overs. If you just found out your favorite rapper is talking about Ciroc vodka or Audi automobiles in his songs, you might be highly susceptible to marketing from those brands. Rap Genius  is quickly becoming the top result for some songs and seeing more “[song title] rap genius” queries. While individual rap lyrics can be difficult to decipher, standalone sites for rock, country, legal, and religious texts could provide macro-level analysis on what entire songs or passages mean. There’s also potential for the original authors to add official explanations that could draw more people to the sites. Says Mogahadam, “I want to see what The Strokes think about their own lyrics.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post is authored by Adeo Ressi, who is the founder of The Founder Institute and TheFunded.com. You can follow him on Twitter here. Every investor and entrepreneur knows there is something scary about the current startup economy. There is an enormous amount of angel capital available, while at the same time there is a small amount of Series A and a large and concentrated amount of late stage capital. Industry insiders have affectionately dubbed this situation “the Barbell”, and it has become the most serious threat to the progress that startups have made — since 2008. At least nine out of ten high-quality angel-funded startups face an unnecessary death, because there is no Series A money to help them survive critical expansion. (See Rip’s post on the rise in late stage capital here.)  In the last boom ending in 2008, there was approximately $30 billion in angel investments and another $30 billion in venture investments done every year. By most estimates, there is now as much as $80 billion in angel versus just over $10 billion in all stages of venture. Just 1 in 100 angel deals may get funded by venture capitalists today, yet there are probably at least 10 strong startups in a 100, if not more. As if this were not bad enough, estimates are that 70% of angel deals across the United States and a growing number of investments in other countries are structured as convertible debt. The debt needs to convert into Series A equity within a year, or the debt needs to be paid back. Investors regularly extend the debt that has come due for another year, since asking the startup to pay back the loan would bankrupt the business. With 10 or 20 angels of varying levels of sophistication in a deal, it only takes one angel to request a payback, and the company will go down. (Elad Gil has a smart post on TechMeme today that also analyzes this series A crunch.) The solution to this structural problem in the startup economy is simple: we need more venture funds. Unfortunately, thousands of funds around the world have been killed off since 2007. Just in the last three months, 1 of 4 of the top-rated venture capitalists on TheFunded have left their firm or the field altogether, so further declines in Series A investments are on the horizon. At this pace, the venture industry won’t hit bottom until 2014, after which turnover cycles in limited partners and growing returns from secondary markets should support new interest in the asset class. In the end, more funds will save the good companies and balance out the infamous barbell. All of this means that it is precisely the right moment to launch a fund. First, you have a large number of high-quality companies that need capital, while the competition to provide capital is decreasing. Second, you have a pool of frustrated limited partners looking for new managers. Finally, there are new forms of liquidity that are starting to drive returns, most notably the active secondary markets. It probably won’t get much easier to launch a new fund than it is right now, and the startup economy needs the help. A great source of these new fund leaders may be the hundreds of people setting up Y Combinator clones around the world. These seed-fund/ incubators require two to three million dollars per year to run, producing between 10 and 20 angel funded companies. Many of these will fail due to the high cost of annual operations without a functioning Series A market. The people that set these incubators up have already raised capital, so they are in a good position to set-up a fund. If you are really bold, like Dave McClure, you can run both an incubator and a fund, though there are some obvious conflicts of interest. Running a fund is not for everyone, but, if you think you have it in you, go for it. Now is the time. Another important note: There is the upcoming Founder Showcase on November 8th, where TC’s founder Mike Arrington will be the keynote speaker, and I am sure he will talk about the issue on stage at the event. Apply to pitch for free here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily MADS, a provider of mobile display and messaging ad serving solutions, has raised €1 million – or roughly $1.4 million – in funding in a Series B round led by OTM Investments (both the company and the investor are based in The Netherlands). MADS says it will use the fresh capital to take its business beyond mobile ad serving and set up sales offices in the UK, Germany, Italy, France and Spain to support clients in their local languages. Read more at TechCrunch Europe. Latest headlines delivered to you daily ‘Tis the season of the IPO. So far, 2011 has seen companies like LinkedIn, Pandora, Yandex, Zillow, and RenRen come to market. As you’ve heard, Groupon and Zynga are next up in the IPO pipeline, with both companies arriving on public markets within weeks of each other. Groupon, barring some catastrophic event, will begin trading publicly on NASDAQ November 4th, with shares set at $20 a pop at a valuation of $12.7 billion. Zynga, too, is expected to trade on NASDAQ beginning the week before Thanksgiving, and according to its revised S-1 filing with the SEC, a “third party” has valued the company at approximately $14 billion.  In the same ballpark as Groupon. So, the question becomes this: Notwithstanding their potential overvaluations at the time they go public, which of the two companies stands to be the most successful and the most valuable in the long run, post-IPO? Both Zynga and Groupon have become lightning rods of late for criticism over their inflated valuations (among other things), especially as being representative of the high valuations across the industry. (Some attach the dreaded “bubble” label, some don’t, but there is anxiety brewing here no matter what you call it.) There are a lot of questions that need to be answered in short order if the public markets are to become comfortable with the $10+ billion valuations of Zynga and Groupon. That being said, both companies have waited out the stumbling IPO market and remain (far and away) the market leaders in their respective neighborhoods. In spite of the naysayers, these companies are going to go on to make a lot of money and will be around for the foreseeable future. Zynga is arguably the most popular social/casual game developer in the world, with 232 million average monthly active users in 166 countries and it’s generated over $1.25 billion in cumulative revenue since its inception in 2007. Groupon is running ahead of Zynga in revenues, but not on profits. For those bullish on group buying, Groupon owns 54 percent of the daily deal market, is the largest local commerce platform with scale effects, counts 143+ million email subscribers in its ranks, and is building on its lead in daily deals by moving into complementary markets, like events, goods, travel, and is attempting to close the redemption loop by merging daily deals, instant mobile offers, and loyalty rewards. Of course, everything sounds picture perfect if you put a full stop there. Hell, give ’em $30 billion! But there are some downsides. Oh yes, there are some downsides. For starters, both Groupon and Zynga count themselves as technology companies. But, in the case of Groupon, if you’re in Rocky’s camp, then the company may not even be worthy of the title, in spite of CEO Andrew Mason’s repeated assertions during the roadshow to the contrary. As Agrawal points out, only 5 percent of Groupon’s more than 10,000 employees are in technology. That’s probably less than some of the local merchants it “represents”. Groupon’s growth is indeed decelerating, cutting back on marketing and sales expenses to become more profitable (or to dress up its financials for the IPO). Blodget was quick to identify a precedent in Amazon, comparing Groupon’s current status to Amazon’s painful transition from growth to profits between 1997 and 2001. Both companies waited three years to go public, and while Groupon is generating lower revenue per employee and has been spending more on marketing than Amazon did, the e-commerce giant continued to grow over its first four years as a public company, even though its growth rate slowed. Much like Groupon in the present. As to the technology comparison, in juxtaposition today, Amazon has a far more diverse set of traditional “tech assets” with its innovation in cloud computing with EC2, S3, and other Web services, some of which support the ever-improving Kindle. Groupon’s lofty IPO (and sale of $700 million worth of stock) brings up comparisons with Google. But Groupon is a sales and marketing (or services) company. The 5 percent of its employees involved in technology are there mostly to maintain the infrastructure. Groupon’s on the Web, but that doesn’t make it a tech company. If you want to use Google as a comparison, the search giant spends 14 percent of its revenues on R&D. It has Google Labs. Apple’s the same way. Tech companies spend money on R&D, they hire as many engineers as possible (see Facebook), there are barriers to entry, and they develop intellectual properties. Groupon not so much. As for Zynga, the gaming company’s R&D spend (in Q1) was up 158 percent from the same time last year, and it spends an enormous amount (proportionally) of its revenues on servers. In comparison to Groupon the “sales company” (it has over 4,800 employees in sales), Zynga proudly calls itself an “analytics company masquerading as a games company”. What that means is that Zynga believes that it will beat traditional gaming companies by taking an alternative route to customer acquisition and retention. It releases free games on Facebook and then obsessively studies the data it collects on how users are playing the game, leveraging that data to tweak the game’s formula to make the gameplay more addictive, increase playability, etc. Using Facebook as a sharing and marketing platform to tell friends about the game and get them to buy more virtual goods is one thing, but Facebook also provides Zynga with a more robust picture of who their users are and what they’re doing online. This allows the company to take advantage of the platform’s ready-made ability to invite new users to try the game, something offline gaming companies have to work much harder to accomplish. Zynga just smells more like a tech company. In spite of all that’s being said, I’m still optimistic about Groupon because of its redemption loop trifecta. The company has long been criticized for not providing merchants with the necessary tools to retain the new customers they see when offering Groupon discounts. But with Groupon Now, the mobile app that lets local merchants offer deals when business is slow to yield retention, and Groupon Rewards, the tool that will allow businesses that offer discounts to later follow-up with another reward after a customer spends a certain amount of money — Groupon is showing that it can offer valuable products to close the gap. (And, hey, with high-end deals of Groupon Reserve, discounts on electronics in Groupon Goods, these could all add up to something retailers can’t ignore.) Considering the fact that merchants can set the spending level required to achieve the new deal with Groupon Rewards, it should put their collective minds at ease. And for the daily deal behemoth, which already has millions of credit cards on file, it enables them to essentially turn these credit cards into the buy 10 get one free punchcards, and with each visit to a local coffee shop, Groupon can push them mobile or email notifications telling them that they’re just $10 away from the reward. Its new rewards program can actually track what customers are spending at their local merchants, giving them better insight into the success of their core business, daily deals. And merchants will get a dashboard so that they, too, can track customer spending. Zynga’s true value, on the other hand, comes from its innovation around in-game rewards. Adding virtual enhancements to its games to convince people to spend real money on virtual play money is what has turned it into a multi-billion dollar company. A few years ago, that was a far more difficult proposition than it sounds today. If Zynga can develop full control over the virtual money supply, it can be huge. There is a bright future around virtual currency, and if Zynga could use its self-controlled platform to institute a virtual currency that is widely circulated and has real inherent value, it could be a serious game changer. Groupon may be valued at $12.7 billion at its IPO, but Trefis currently estimates Groupon fair value at about $7.9 billion, 54 percent of which emanates from North American featured deals. Trefis arrived at this valuation by collecting the sum of the values of its divisions, plus cash, minus debt. Blodget’s formula has similar results. Taking the fact that Groupon’s North American business had a 12% operating profit margin in Q3, he projects that it could see a 10% operating profit margin in 2012 and a 15% operating margin in 2013, with earnings of about $300 million in 2013, giving Groupon a $6 to $9 billion valuation, with an average of about $7.5 billion. Comparable to Trefis. While I do believe Groupon will be a profitable company with a big market cap, its valuation is seriously inflated. The fact is that Google Offers, Amazon Local, and LivingSocial all pose significant threats. Without a single patent and little to no significant barriers to entry in the space, Groupon has a ways to go before it convinces investors (and now the public) that there’s enough differentiation and value in its model to warrant a high market cap. As for Zynga, unlike Groupon, the social games giant is already profitable. However, the company saw its net income fall to $1.4 million in the second quarter, down from $13.9 million over the same period last year. It, too, has some serious downsides. The company’s filings show that its revenues come from less than 5 percent of its users and from a small group of games. While the company is working on deploying games on other platforms, most of the company’s business is still generated on Facebook, and it still heavily relies on the social network for sales and the delivery of its major services. (Facebook also takes a significant chunk of the sale of virtual goods.) In the land of social gaming, Zynga must continuously churn out new games to keep users interested, as casual games have the tendency to become stale quickly. As Industry Gamers points out, Zynga’s new titles are hitting peak daily active users inside of three weeks of launch and the majority aren’t sustaining that activity (with Words With Friends being the one exception). Instead, the new releases have only succeeded in cannibalizing gamers from other Zynga titles, rather than attracting new customers. Relying on in-game purchases and rewards to encourage gamers to keep users engaged with its titles has been successful thus far, and while investors aren’t happy about its reliance on Facebook, the public perception that its fate is largely tied to Facebook isn’t all bad. Zynga has been receiving lofty valuations in part because it is basically seen as a proxy investment for Facebook. Even Zynga’s Project Z, which is supposed to be the company’s big play at cutting its umbilical cord, will require users to have a Facebook account to log on. But I think there is huge opportunity for Zynga on mobile and tablets, and if it can keep game development costs low while drawing new users in with Project Z and some new, original titles, profit margins could grow significantly with scale. Some (optimistic) analysts have even put its long-term operating margins at 50 percent. Zynga expects to see about $1 billion in revenue for 2011, compared to Groupon’s expected revenue of $1.6 billion for the year, but it’s profitable with net incomes north of $19 million for the first nine months of 2011. Zynga is nowhere near its original target of a $20 billion valuation with its revised S-1 and SEC scrutiny over Zyngametrics, but it deserves to be priced above Groupon. Although EA’s market cap is currently around $7.8 billion, if one is comfortable saying that Zynga can hit $4 billion in revenues by 2014 with 40 percent operating margins, we would have to be generous to give them a 13 to 16 multiple on operating profits, but this could easily justify a $15 billion valuation. In the end, both Groupon and Zynga are currently valued at prices that are far higher than what I think they’re reasonably worth. I have no stake in either company, but if I were buying, I would choose Zynga over Groupon. I think there’s a greater upside to Zynga and as gamification is poised to seep into everything we do, Zynga is poised to be at the forefront of this transformation. Groupon is here to stay, but there’s just way too much to be concerned about. But I’m just one blogger. I want to know what you think. Weigh in below. Thanks to BGN Entrepreneur for the excerpt image Latest headlines delivered to you daily Want to predict what your personal health will look like tomorrow, or 10 years from now? Well, look no further than 100Plus a new stealthy health startup founded by Chris Hogg, a healthcare and health data research specialist and Ryan Howard the Founder and CEO of free EMR service, Practice Fusion.  Essentially, 100Plus is a personalized health prediction platform that uses data analytics and game mechanics to show just how much small changes in one’s behavior can lead to a longer and fuller life.  And for their own financial health, the startup announced this morning that it has raised a $500,000 round of seed funding from Founders Fund via its own founder and managing partner, Peter Thiel. Thiel, for those unfamiliar, is the co-founder and former CEO of Paypal and was the first investor in Facebook. It’s no mystery why 100Plus’ mission is appealing to investors. The healthtech space is booming, and entrepreneurs and investors are looking for smarter and more effective ways to leverage the ever-growing healthcare dataset to build smart solutions that lead to healthier lifestyles and longer lives. Unanimously, we all want to be healthier, and we also want to know how our current behaviors are going to effect us down the line. 23andMe is a great example of this, as it is attempting to build the largest dataset and resource for genetic information on the planet as well as offering genetic analysis to let users see if they are at risk for a number of diseases. Obviously, the possibilities are many. Like 23andMe, 100Plus is building an interactive health application that leverages large clinical datasets. Using its own algorithms to parse that data, it will then show users personalized predictions of their future health as well as allow them to compare their health those with common dimensions of health and habits. The startup then adds a bit of game mechanics to that analysis to give users a more enjoyable way to make incremental changes in their behavior to improve their health and live longer.  As to its data, 100Plus builds on the Practice Fusion Research Division’s proprietary clinical dataset of 24 million de-identified records and public datasets from the CDC and HealthData.gov. The startup then uses this anonymized data to create predictive models of future health. “When you’re 80, will you be riding a wheelchair or a bicycle? How do your health decisions today impact your quality of life in 50 years?” said Founders Fund Partner Brian Singerman. “By generating predictions about health, based on enormous datasets and user behavior, 100Plus gives us life-changing insights.” 100Plus is currently in stealth mode, hard at work on building these models, and is planning a beta launch to the public in mid-2012. The startup also is hiring and seeking new partners looking to incorporate additional valuable health data into its model.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In July, Kickanotch Mobile, a mobile marketing services startup based in the outskirts of Kansas City, raised $500K from a bunch of angel investors and was “incentivized by” the Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation, a private/public partnership created by the state of Kansas to promote technology-based economic development and support local entrepreneurship.  And it seems that they’re not the only ones rooting for Kansas startups, as Kickanotch Mobile today announced that it has raised another chunk of outside investment: A $1.1 million series A round led by 42 Ventures of Salt Lake City. The company said that it will use its new funding to expand its sales, marketing, and engineering teams, as well as accelerate the development of new features for its mobile platform. Kickanotch provides mobile application and mobile marketing platform services to allow its clients, which include TV broadcasters, radio stations, publishers and corporations, a way to increase brand exposure and better utilize mobile revenue channels and consumer engagement opportunities. Brands can take advantage of its mobile marketing and monetization applications and platform management SaaS without having to involve developers or spend a lot of time worrying about marketing spend.  The startup has built a mobile platform that includes native apps for all major devices, as well as an easy to use control panel, analytics dashbord, and an ad delivery solution all under one roof. Its newly launched “REVkick platform” does exactly this, giving clients an online web control panel to manage campaigns, track user data, and manage web content in realtime. The startup has some competition in the mobile advertising space, but its solution has already drawn more than 50 broadcast, publishing and corporate brands and its media partners’ apps have been downloaded in more than 100 countries with user growth consistently doubling month over month. The team thinks that its newly launched features, like mobile analytics, lead tracking, and sponsorship marquees can drive significant boosts in mobile ad revenue, while the ability to engage mobile users with social features, deals, and “free, we hate spam” offers, can drive 3-times the engagement of current solutions. For more on Kickanotch’s mobile apps, check ’em out here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In August, Y Combinator grad Kicksend launched in beta to make sending and sharing large files easy as pie, especially for the non-technical crowd. (Read our initial coverage here.) Since then, founders Pradeep Elankumaran and Brendan Lim tell me that they’ve been heads-down fixing, tweaking, and developing some big new features. While those are not yet ready for broadcast, the startup is today announcing that it has raised $1.8 million in seed funding.  The seed round was led by True Ventures, with participation from Digital Garage, SV Angel, Start Fund, and Milo Founder and CEO Jack Abraham. Kicksend will be using its new capital to grow its team and push out several big enhancements to its file sharing service.  Though the founders said that they’ve seen a number of businesses using the site to share and send files, Kicksend remains focused on the consumer, particularly on creating a simple, intuitive user experience that even your grandmother can use. To date, the service is available both on the Web and on the desktop, but mobile apps are on the way. For those unfamiliar with the service, Kicksend’s value proposition lies both in its simplicity and the fact that its platforms are connected in realtime, enabling users to drag and drop big batches of files from their desktop app and have them delivered instantly to the recipient’s desktop and web apps, their inbox (and soon) their mobile apps.  What’s more, in comparison to other file sharing media, Kicksend has no size limits, is private, and works effortlessly and asynchronously (unlike IM). In contrast with syncing backup solutions, the service removes the need for share folders and permissions.  It’s a nifty tool for those looking to effortlessly send large batches of files and with backing from some notable VCs, there’s surely more interesting stuff to come.  Check out Kicksend at home here, or read our full launch coverage here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily New York City’s Art.sy, which wants to change the way people buy fine art, recently closed a $6 million series A.  Peter Thiel personally led the round, with existing investors Josh Kushner’s Thrive Capital, Wendi Murdoch, and Dasha Zhukova participating. The startup previously raised $1.25 million a year ago.  Eric Schmidt, Jack Dorsey, and Jim Breyer also invested in that seed round. Art.sy first appeared at TechCrunch Disrupt NYC in May, 2010, but the site still has not launched beyond a small private beta.  The company is taking a long-term approach to digitizing the art world, striking deals with top galleries before it opens up so that it can launch with some of the best art in the world.  So far, it has deals with 180 galleries in 40 countries.  This approach is akin to what Spotify did when it took two years to line up all the record labels before launching in the U.S. Art.sy is creating a website that makes it easy to browse and discover paintings and other fine art, and connect prospective art collectors with galleries.  The art world is a high-end industry which has resisted the encroachments of the Web. Art.sy hopes to change that by making art more accessible to a broader class of consumers who are currently ignored by the art establishment.  The company will use the funds to hire more people (it is currently looking for a top-notch Web designer and director of museum relations). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Extreme Venture Partners, the Toronto and Palo Alto-based early-stage venture firm, today announced that it is launching a new-and-improved version of its accelerator program, Extreme University — also known as “ExtremeU”. Extreme Venture Partner’s accelerator program has been up and running since 2009 and is aimed at becoming a training ground and valuable ecosystem for Canadian startups targeting the social, mobile, and local spaces.  Extreme University graduates, like Locationary and Uken Games have gone on to raise millions in follow-on financing rounds. Jon Evans also recently wrote about Maide, a current ExtremeU participant that’s turning iPads everywhere into 3-D controllers. Extreme University’s revamped model will consist of a 12-week program, in which five selected teams will share office space at the venture firm’s offices in Toronto, along with access to its network of founders, advisors, and developers. Extreme University will run two 12-week programs a year, each with five participating startups. What’s more, founders will also have the opportunity to participate in weekly personal sessions with experts and advisors, as well as work directly with key members of of some of the tech industry’s biggest companies.  Case in point: The accelerator is today announcing the first of its collaborating partners, which is none other than the social network of record, Facebook. Representatives from Facebook (which will include Elmer Sotto, FB’s head of growth in Canada, and his team) will work with startups to design and build socially-enhanced products in addition to offering product strategy and design mentorship, including educating founders on the best ways to leverage its Open Graph to create powerful distribution channels for their products.  Facebook reps will also enable startups to test new features on the platform and offer feedback on the tools startups create during the program before they’re launched to the public. In addition to this awesome collaboration with Facebook, the startups chosen to participate in ExtremeU will receive $50,000 in funding. The venture firm will be taking an equity stake in the companies chosen to participate. While the exact level of equity taken has yet to be decided, it will likely be between 5 to 10 percent. Among the mentors that will be sharing their wisdom with ExtremeU’s class of startups will be former Facebook VP (and the founder of Social+Capital Partnership) Chamath Palihapitiya as well as Albert Lai of Kontagent, Tomi Poutanen of Yahoo Answers, and more. You can check out the list of mentors here. Extreme Venture Partners has forged (and is forging) some deep relationships with Facebook, Google, and other well-known tech companies that have significant presences in Canada. While Y Combinator, TechStars et al get a lot play in the media (and deservedly so), it’s nice to see our neighbors to the north building a valuable resource (and ecosystem) for early-stage companies — and encouraging them to stay in Canada and help to build Toronto into a vibrant tech community. For more on Extreme Ventures, check ’em out at home here. Startups can apply to ExtremeU here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The daily deal space continues to be as active as ever. This means, on the one hand, there’s a lot of innovation and experimentation with new models happening in the space, but, on the other, there’s also plenty of derivative technology, clones, and noise. This is largely because the barriers to entry are so low, if not non-existent; everybody and their mother seems to have a daily deals site, or is using one. Of course, this generally results in deal overload, expiration, disorganization, and a thousand other pain points.  Deal wallets, deal maps, secondary resale marketplaces, and more have popped up to address these issues. And today, another startup enters the space (in beta), called deel.io, which, simply put, wants to bring a bit of organization and simplicity to the wild and woolly deal space. Deelio’s method of attack isn’t exactly new, as it is essentially an aggregator that lets users view deals in the local area through map and list-based UIs. Dealmap, which was scooped up by Google in August, did pretty much exactly that. 8coupons has a great dealmap, too, and so on.  Of course, deelio does have search expertise going for it. The co-founders, Sanjay Mavinkurve and Vijay Boyapati are both former Google engineers. While there is plenty of competition in deal aggregation, Mavinkurve holds that no one is really doing search well, and being former Googlers, “search is in our blood”, he says. It also happens that Mavinkurve was one of the early engineers at HarvardConnection (later known as ConnectU), which was founded by the Winklevosses and Divya Narendra in 2002. Mavikurve began the early work on HarvardConnection, but graduated in 2003 and went to work for Google. Victor Gao replaced Mavikurve in a part-time capacity, before recommending Mark Zuckerberg. The rest, as they say, is history. While deelio’s “Deal Search Engine” already offers deal search for some dozen cities, it still has a ways to go in terms of volume of deals. But the site is still in beta, and that will come. The real value proposition, aside from the easy-to-use search function is the design. Both the deal map and the list interface are very clean, are quick to respond and load, and offer the ability to view Yelp reviews in search listings, which is a nifty little feature.  With plenty of options in terms of deal aggregators, offering a great product experience an appealing visual layout can make all the difference to user acquisition and retention. Many daily deal users complain about receiving deals or only being able to find deals that really have no relevance to the things they enjoy. Especially for guys who aren’t necessarily looking for $50 off spa treatments, offering the ability to find what they’re looking for without signing up for multiple deal sites is key.  In addition, deelio incorporates vacation and escape packages, a vertical that is becoming increasingly popular on daily deal sites through its so-called “deelio Vacations”, which map out discounts at hotels around the world so that users can see if there are deals being offered in their target destination. The team is also currently working on a number of other enhancements to the site’s usability, including features like personalized email digest, additional categorization, and advanced search criteria.  In the crazy free-for-all that is the daily deals space, deelio’s clean design and navigable deal map and search engine are definitely welcome additions. Check deelio out at home here and let us know what you think. Update: As of November 11th, deelio has officially changed its name to “The Dealmix”. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Application performance and analytics solution provider Tracelytics has just closed a seed round of $600,000 from Battery Ventures, Flybridge Capital Partners, Google Ventures, and several prominent angel investors. The Tracelytics solution, currently in a limited release, is a SaaS-based application performance management (APM) tool that’s used to  provide visibility into complex, distributed Web applications written in PHP, Ruby or Python. As any startup can tell you, ensuring that your Web applications stay up and running is critical, but it’s not an easy task. It can also be a big, expensive time suck, especially when many of the current siloed solutions don’t give you the full view of what’s going on. Tracelytics attempts to make that process easier by handling the data collection across layers and machines, then presents it to you in an easy-to-read dashboard interface, so you can see what’s going on, where and why. The service provides end-to-end tracing, data filtering, machine-level metrics and error reporting. At present, it works on Debian, Ubuntu, Red Hat and CentOS, and supports the HTTP and Thrift protocols. The Providence, Rhode Island-based company was founded in June 2010 by Spiros Eliopoulos, Dan Kuebrich and Chris Erway. Eliopoulos and Kuebrich previously worked together at Amie Street, while Erway was previously at IBM. The company is currently offering discounted pricing to early users via its website.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new startup called Euclid Elements emerged from stealth mode today to debut its customer-tracking solution for brick-and-mortar merchants it’s calling “Google Analytics for the physical world.” The name is an apt description for the new solution, which employs sensors and wireless technology to track customer behavior, as its founding team actually includes former Google Analytics engineers. Euclid also announced its $5.8 million in Series A funding from New Enterprise Associates (NEA), Harrison Metal, Triple Point Capital and other angel investors. Euclid Co-founder Scott Crosby previously co-founded Urchin, which was acquired by Google in 2005 and became Google Analytics. His brother, Brett Crosby, also an Urchin Co-founder, now sits on Euclid’s board. The company’s CEO, Will Smith, has an interesting background too, as the grandson of John Smith, an early shopping center developer and co-founder of the International Council of Shopping Centers (ICSC). You can kind of say that retail runs in his blood. The rest of the 15-person team, primarily engineers (save for one new hire), has backgrounds that include experience at ShopperTrak, IBM, Ariba, TIBCO/Reuters, Google, Playdom, Qualcomm, 23AndMe and Mint/Intuit. So what does Euclid actually do? It uses preconfigured in-store sensors plugged directly into switch in the network closet to track the Wi-Fi signals on customers’ smartphones. In doing so, Euclid can map out and analyze customer shopping behavior, including things like foot patterns (the movement in and out and through the store), plus customer loyalty, retention rates, “dwell time,” and even things like “window conversion rates,” which can be thought of as the offline “click-though.” (A window conversion means a customer sees a window display and then decides to enter the store). The technology has been in development for a year and nine months, says Smith. He also explains that the sensors don’t collect personally identifiable information on customers themselves, despite their ability to track an individual’s movements throughout the store. “The phones ping for access points in the store, and the sensor listens for that,” he says. “It then hashes the MAC address on the phone.” What that means is that the sensor isn’t storing the actual unique identifier (the MAC address) itself, but a representation of that. For customers who still feel uncomfortable, stores will display a sign indicating how to opt-out of the data collection process. Although the data is not available in real-time (there’s a 12-hour delay), it is presented in an online dashboard similar to Google Analytics. The focus for the team’s efforts now is on improving the dashboard’s interface. The analytics service will be sold to merchants on a subscription basis at a cost of $200 per sensor per month. One sensor covers around 1.3 zones (departments), so a large retailer like a Macy’s might need a few sensors to cover its whole store. Palo Alto-based Euclid Elements has been in private beta testing with select retailers in the San Francisco Bay area like Philz Coffee, but is now open to all U.S. merchants.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily The music industry industry has taken some questionable stances on digital technology over the years. To call it resistant to change probably wouldn’t be stepping too far out of line. That’s why, as music fans, we love to hear about cases in which the music industry demonstrates forward thinking and proactively constructs policy that takes new technologies and distribution media into account. Maybe it’s unfair to paint the entire industry with a single stroke, but if this is true of any part of the industry, it’s traditionally been true of the major record labels. The good news is that EMI, one of the big four, is taking some laudable steps to open its vault of music. The record label has teamed up with The Echo Nest, a music intelligence platform whose technology powers a number of music apps from big media companies to indy developers, to create an initiative that will put thousands of its songs and other music-related content (video, photos, and artwork, for example) into the hands of more than 10,000 app developers. According to Echo Nest’s release, the collaboration represents one of the most extensive collections of licensed music to be made available in this way, giving developers a one-stop destination to create cool digital products for EMI’s artists. Traditionally, the labels haven’t played nice with the developer community, bleeding them dry on licensing fees or shutting them out altogether. EMI has an amazing stock of content that is typically very difficult for third-parties to access without jumping through a ton of hoops or involving someone’s lawyer. But not anymore. The new partnership is part of the record label’s OpenEMI initiative, which is focused on digital innovation and improving music licensing processes for new digital apps in a way that is flexible and adaptive for developers. Basically, it’s focusing on letting developers bring their products directly to market, without the requisite hoop-jumping. Man, this kind of stuff should be the norm for music labels, but just the fact that a major record label has created an initiative like this is enough to make me want to stand up and cheer. As part of the new initiative, Echo Nest and EMI have created a sandbox that offers developers creative briefs and a chance to play around in EMI’s bullpen of about 12,000 songs. Only 2K of these are from the general catalog, but precleared content will be offered from artists like Gorillaz, Pet Shop Boys, Professor Green, and several more. The pair have also worked out a standardized fee for these songs, which will see the label take 60 percent of net revenue, with the remaining 40 percent split between Echo Nest and developers, though Echo Nest says that developers should see the majority of that money. As to what will come out of this partnership, that remains to be seen, but it’s certainly a great start for developers looking to get legal, painless access to a great pool of music. Granted, if developers want to play with music outside of the EMI catalog, they’re out of luck, but if EMI can continue to approve more songs, this could have the potential for the development of some cool apps. Probably won’t see a Spotify or a Pandora, but really anything is better than nothing. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This morning, popular audio platform SoundCloud is debuting its brand-new HTML5 widget which will now be offered in beta format alongside its current Flash widget, but will eventually replace it. The completely redesigned widget allows SoundCloud users to embed their recordings and uploads on their blog or website, view information about the sound, its creator, the likes, comments and plays, and easily share the sound to social networks like Facebook, Twitter, and Google+. Also, it just looks way, way better. SoundCloud says the new widget was redesigned to encourage more interactivity around the sound itself and with the listener comments. The timed comments are now more usable on this version of the widget, at the request of SoundCloud users. Before, they would pop up over the track as conversation bubbles. In the new widget, they appear beneath the track in a much more readable format. This first public beta includes the social sharing options noted above, but subsequent versions will include even more social elements. When you click the share button on the top-right, Facebook (Likes), Twitter and Google+ are featured, but smaller icons for Tumblr, Facebook (Share), Reddit, StumbleUpon, and email are available below. The link and embed code are also provided. Because the widget is now built on top of HTML5 technology, SoundCloud will be able to add more features at a faster pace going forward, the company says.At some point in the future, this new widget will replace the Flash version entirely. The HTML5 widget is already live on some Sony Music artists’ pages, including Britney Spears and Big Time Rush, as well as on the Tumblr for Wattpad, a social network for readers and writers. Below are screenshots (not embeds) of the old Flash widget (top) and the new one (below).     Latest headlines delivered to you daily Coraid, a developer of Ethernet SAN storage solutions, this morning announced that it has closed a sizable $50 million series C round led by Crosslink Capital. Coraid’s existing investors Menlo Ventures, Allegis Capital, Azure Capital Partners and affiliates of Silver Lake all participated in the round, as well as new investors including Seagate Technology and Kinetic Ventures.   As Robin pointed out in coverage of the company’s series B investment, it’s interesting to see Menlo Ventures both lead series B and continue with follow-on, considering it was the largest investor in data storage company 3PAR, which was acquired by HP for $2.35 billion last year. It seems like Coraid is Menlo’s next big bet in enterprise storage, and with the startup now having raised $85 million in outside investment, it may well be a target for acquisition.  To that end, Coraid also announced today that it has surpassed 1,500 customers in 45 countries, making it one of the up-and-comers in the $30 billion enterprise data storage market. With its series C investment, Coraid plans to expand global operations and continue developing technology in storage and cloud orchestration.  Coraid’s value proposition lies in its so-called EtherDrive, which offers a considerable price and performance advantage over legacy Fibre Channel and iSCSI solutions. In line with its mantra, Coraid recently acquired of cloud orchestration software vendor Yunteq to enable automation of storage, networks, and security for both public and private clouds.  John Jarve, GP at Menlo Ventures, said in the press release that Coraid has “pioneered a new category of storage” with Ethernet SAN, and that the company represents the next-generation of scale-out virtualized storage which helps companies with growing sets of data move past those aging storage technologies. In other words, Coraid wants to help remove the roadblocks to virtualization and cloud computing, and the company thinks that leveraging improvements in flash storage can help do just that. Its new EtherFlash solution delivers 200,000 IOPS per shelf at $10 per GB.  For more, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In today’s VC market, it’s age before beauty. This is according to a new study released today by Shareholder Representative Services (SRS), the company that represents shareholder interests during the post-closing process in mergers and acquisitions deals. In other words, SRS is an independent advocate for shareholders that offers communications, accounting, and dispute resolution services to an impressive list of clients, which includes the likes of Accel, Benchmark, Kleiner Perkins, Sequoia, Khosla, and more. (Basically, the list is a who’s who of venture firms.) The study, which looks at the 196 transactions SRS was involved in between July 2010 and September 2011, identifies trends in these M&A deal terms: One of which is that startups are today raising significantly more outside financing before exit than they were three years ago. The study found that companies are, on average, raising 3.57 rounds of preferred stock financing — the type of investment that’s the staple of venture capital and private equity firms. This represents a 27+ percent increase from 2008, when startups were averaging 2.8 rounds of financing. Essentially, buyers are favoring companies that have raised more money and are profitable. In a sluggish economy, companies are more risk averse to dumping a lot of money into M&A, so buyers are looking for safe bets.  Furthermore, thanks to market volatility and poor financial conditions, global M&A activity fell by 19 percent in the third quarter, according to Dealogic. Thus, with deals drying up and few companies looking to buy, startups have instead opted to go after further rounds of financing. This is likely the reason that we’ve been seeing “series F” pop up more and more, and may also be another result of how late-stage funding is undergoing a seachange. As Business Insider says in depth, companies are now waiting for longer periods of time to IPO, secondary markets are on the rise, there’s a rise in late-stage private equity, and investing in maturing private companies is becoming ever-more efficient thanks to the Internet and the plethora of financing options, be they crowdfunding, accelerators, etc. SRS also identified another trend on the rise this year: Cash transactions. According to the study, 86 percent of deals it participated in were all-cash transactions, thanks to low interest rates and brimming cash reserves. As Mark Vogel, Managing Director at SRS, told peHub, buyers today “have lots of offshore cash and don’t want to pay the repatriation taxes to the U.S. They’d rather use it”.  And this cash seems to be flowing into big deals, as 25 percent of transactions were for over $200 million — with the software and IT services industries representing over 40 percent of the businesses being sold over the last 14 months. Thus, with more cash exchanging hands as part of this elevated rate of follow-on and late-stage financing, management teams have become more diluted and are requiring further incentives to get in-line with the milestones set by buyers during acquisitions. The study found that this has led to an increase in management carve-out plans, which were part of 33 percent of deals in 2010 and have been part of 25 percent of deals in 2011.  For startups and mid-level companies, it seems that the prevailing trend is to raise more money, hold-off on IPO, and wait for the right buyer — with cash.  Excerpt image from myLot.com Latest headlines delivered to you daily Let’s say you’re a first-time entrepreneur. You’ve got a great idea for a product or business, but you don’t know where to start. You don’t know any VCs or angels, maybe your company isn’t right for an incubator, but you want firsthand advice from experts on how to proceed. While there are tons of amazing online resources for entrepreneurs and there’s some terrific expert advice on Quora on an array of entrepreneurial subjects, little of this information is personalized. This is one example of the value proposition of Evisors, a startup that is building a marketplace of expert advice. Founded in May 2010 by Harvard Business School grads Fredrik Marø, Marc Weiner, Dan Levy, and Wharton grad Christine Apold, Evisors offers on-demand advice, allowing consumers to go beyond their own personal and professional networks to search its database of experienced experts to directly schedule consultations. The startup soft launched its marketplace in September 2010 behind the idea that cold calls and emails are often ineffective ways to build one’s expert network, and getting answers to your tough questions is far more difficult than it should be. In its early stages, as one can imagine, career and graduate school advice was Evisor’s first big seller, and the startup worked to bring former professors and admissions officers into its fold to give young people their industry expertise as well as advice on job hunting strategies, interview practice, resume and cover letter help, business consulting and career management, etc. The Evisors network has since expanded to include three main categories: Admissions, business, and career experts, which now counts CEOs, entrepreneurs, investors, experienced professionals and business consultants as members of its marketplace.   Earlier this month, Evisors further expanded its offerings to officially include an entrepreneurship network in an effort to give startups seeking expert guidance access to hundreds of entrepreneurs and business advisors. To find an expert, customers use the marketplace’s simple search interface to identify relevant experts, view their profiles and evaluate them based on their qualifications, user reviews, ratings, availability, and, of course, their hourly rates.  Once a user has selected an expert, they can schedule a phone consultation or submit an email inquiry. Experts set their own rates, which range from $30 to more than $500 per consultation depending on things like length of the session, the expert’s education level, career background and experience, and so on. The startup’s entrepreneurship network features startup experts like investor and author Dave Berkus (best known for his “Berkus Method” of evaluating early-stage investments) who has participated in more than 80 tech investments over the last decade — as well as David Ronick, co-founder of the online startup incubator, Upstart Bootcamp.  Most of these experts, Evisors CEO Fredrik Maro told us, have full-time jobs, so the marketplace is not a primary money-making tool for first time business consultants. Really, it gives industry veterans an opportunity to give back to the community, interact with likeminded people, and share their hard-earned knowledge. That being said, the marketplace provides a nice complement to their salaries, with a few experts having earned over $10,000 over the course of the year. For those looking for expert advice, there is also the opportunity to take advantage of free consultations, which are primarily a result of new experts joining the community who have been vetted by the Evisors staff but have not yet received a significant feedback rating. Maro said that he sees Evisors as the next link in the chain after Quora, providing those in need of advice with a middle ground between the opinionators and, say, the mentorship (and equity-taking) of startup incubators. Maro also pointed out that Evisors eats its own dogfood, too — the startup has been using the advice of its experts to help grow its own business. And so far, this method of attack seems to be working, as the startup has seen the number of consultations sold in its marketplace grow nearly tenfold over the same period last year.  Up until recently, Evisors has been bootstrapped, but today the company is officially announcing that it has raised $600,000 from Nebula Ventures (the VC arm of Universum Global, which owns sites like wetfeet.com and doostang.com), as well as angel investors like New York Angels.  Besides taking a small percentage of consultation sales, the startup is also monetizing through affiliate partnerships in which third parties host Evisors widgets to showcase experts relevant to their audiences. These sites earn a referral fee for each consultation sold that emanates from their platforms.  Through its strategic partnership with Nebula Ventures qua Universum, Evisors has partnered with job sites Wetfeet.com and Doostang, as well as company review site Glassdoor.com, among others. With partnerships and new funding in its pocket, Evisors is setting its sights on becoming the online destination to get subject matter expertise. It still has a long way to go, but it’s off to a good start. For more, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Venuelabs, a company which got its start as Valuevine before a pivot in early 2011, is launching a new service called VenueRank this week at the Geo-Loco conference in San Francisco. VenueRank, simply put, operates somewhat like a “Klout for storefronts,” as it allows brands with multiple stores to compare those against each other or against their competitors using a single, at-a-glance score. Although comparing VenueRank to Klout helps to wrap your mind around the product’s offering, it’s doing it a disserve. Klout is still in its early stages of development, and there’s too much emphasis on its ego-boosting side effects instead of its more practical use cases. Unlike Klout, VenueRank’s potential end users, in this case brands, don’t need any convincing of the service’s worth. The company has been working with approximately 500 brands during beta tests, and is now running VenueRank on 68,000 storefronts across 7 countries. Current customers include Ruby Tuesday, Jaguar, Aspen Dental, Little Caesar’s, Red Robin, Precision Tune Auto Care, Roto-Rooter, Interim Healthcare and many others. To determine a store’s ranking (its “VenueRank”), the service looks at a number of factors, such as local community engagement, size, growth, reach and sentiment. These are determined through social media analysis, which includes things like Facebook and Foursquare check-ins, Facebook “likes,” online comments and tips, plus user reviews from sites like CitySearch, Yahoo Local, Bing Places and more. The rankings are displayed on an online dashboard which also supports custom views and email alerts. Brands can compare different stores individually, groups of stores, or even their own stores against the competition. And when examining the analytics provided, brands can drill down into the data to see the exact details of who checked in and when, who liked it, who commented, what the reviews say, etc. Venuelabs is partnered with Saepio, PlayNetwork, and has just added GroupM, WPP’s consolidated media investment management operation, which will integrate VenueRank’s local storefront analytics into its own offerings. It also has a number of agency partnerships in the works for next year. At launch, VenueRank will be available on a subscription basis, where pricing is determined by the number of locations. Since its pivot, Venuelabs has seen 30% month-over-month growth, it’s now reporting. The company is now a team of 10 (6 full-time), including CEO Neil Crist and CTO Pete Mannix. It’s currently lightly funded, with $450,000 raised from local angels.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Many companies have begun to realize that social is not just a new channel or a new fad, it’s a new way of doing business. But learning the ropes, how to use social networks and social channels, and optimize and tailor social features for one’s business is easier said than done. This is where Gigya enters the equation. The startup offers a SaaS technology (or a social CRM platform, if you will) to help businesses make their websites social, integrating their online appendages with Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, etc. and consolidating the best social features into one solution. To date, the startup supports more than 280 million users each month across more than 500,000 sites, with customers that include names like CBS, Fox Sports, Intuit, The Coca-Cola Company, The Home Depot, and Turner Networks, to name a few. Gigya is big on social widgets and plug-ins, offering businesses the best of both in an effort to increase social registrations to get that much-coveted social graph info on users and customers and make it easier for them to sign up from their favorite social platforms, word-of-mouth marketing, community interaction and engagement — all that good stuff. It may sound like industry jargon, but leveraging this kind of optimized social functionality can be a boon for businesses, increasing the sharing of a business’ content or brand reach on platforms where, let’s be honest, half of the world is now interacting. While the startup has made a play into social commerce with widgets to integrate e-Commerce platforms with social networks, etc., Gigya is today announcing the launch of an important (and perhaps somewhat intimidating) new technology that has big data implications. Social data implications, of course. The tech has been dubbed the “Identity Management Platform”, and essentially, it enables businesses to better manage user data by providing them with complete, permission-based access to a user’s social, profile, and behavior data culled from activity on their websites. What sets the Identity Management Platform apart from other user management systems is that it combines both social data and on-site activity data (like commenting and sharing). The point is to help businesses solve a big hangup inherent to data collection/management, being that many big businesses struggle to keep their customer registration up to date. Most often, they have to rely on the registration info provided by customers during their initial sign up, which tends to change with the tides.  Otherwise, businesses might be forced to go out and purchase customer data from third parties, which can be expensive, often lacks interest graph info, and just, well, puts a bad taste in your mouth. As a customer, you might be thankful that your interest graph info isn’t included in the third party-packaged identity info (that’s yours) being bought and sold, but for businesses this represents a customer targeting, retention, and service goldmine. And, let’s be honest, this is the norm. By putting social and on-site activity data in the cloud, Gigya allows its clients to access their visitors’ up-to-date social data, leveraging it through email marketing campaigns, content recommendations, and even segmentation for hyper-relevant ad targeting.   Importantly, users are authorizing sites to access their social/behavior graph data when they authenticate (with their social identities) when they register or login through Gigya’s social plugins that are integrated onto the business’ site. Again, potentially scary for users, but a huge time and money saver for big retailers, media companies, etc. The new platform also offers a cloud-based user registration system so that sites can maintain a unified user database across a network of sites by way of single sign-on for both social and traditional authentication. The Identity Management Platform is also integrated with Gigya’s suite of social plugins, including social login, ratings and reviews, comments, sharing, and game mechanics, so that clients can target their users all the more efficiently. For example, using the platform, marketers can easily create a list of all users who have a college degree, like travelling, and are socially influential. Obviously, the social web provides businesses with the opportunity to understand their customers in more granular and focused ways, and by allowing these clients to access (and map) their users’ social data in the cloud, this has the potential to have a high value proposition for brands and their team of marketers. So look out, these teams are now becoming armed with realtime social data and tools that facilitate the personalization of ads and content, and soon they’ll know how to use it — and know who you are. Always? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Womply’s “Efortless Offers” is a new offers platform that links local merchants’ discounts to all major credit and debit cards, including Visa, MasterCard, American Express and Discover. Live now in the D.C. area, with plans to roll out to five additional markets by early January, the service feels like a daily deal site for consumers, but works like targeted advertising for local merchants. The key differences between Womply and something like Groupon are that the offers are personalized for the consumers and are directed towards specific audiences. They don’t require a certain number of buyers in order to “tip,” and there are no coupons to print. The company, which just launched last week in the D.C. area, was founded by former GM and Head of Sales at LivingSocial Brandt Squires, whose old startup, BuyYourFriendADrink was acquired by LivingSocial in 2009, and Toby Scammell (yes, him, but lets not doom Womply on a 24-year-old’s mistake, shall we?) Womply has raised nearly $1 million from Dave McClure of 500 Startups and Deebek Ventures, LLC. Here’s how Womply’s Effortless Offers works: Upon signup, via Facebook login typically, Womply can tap into the customer’s Facebook profile data to initially locate and display the best offer in the neighborhood. To claim the deal, the customer will purchase it on their credit or debit card. Later, when they visit the merchant, they pay the full price for the goods or service provided. Womply, which has partnerships with banks and other financial partners, can spot the transaction and then credit the difference. The credit shows up within two days.  Although Womply means customers spend more money upfront, there are several benefits to the service, both for consumers and merchants alike. Consumers don’t have to remember to print out coupons or carry them around with them – they can just use their credit or debit card as usual to receive the deal. Also, because the deals require the additional upfront investment, consumers are less likely to buy a deal on impulse, and are more likely to purchase only those deals they plan to use. The targeting and personalization helps cut down on the noise created by daily deals, too, which is the same route Google is now going with its Google Offers product. For merchants, Womply’s ability to spot the transactions means it knows how many offers were redeemed with 100% confidence. In addition, because of Womply’s personalization capabilities, merchants don’t view Womply as a “daily deals” service – they view it as something more akin to targeted advertising.  Further down the road, Womply will be able to use its transaction-spotting capabilities to further refine the deals it pitches consumers and reward their loyalty to specific merchants. This is likely the basis of its next, still undisclosed, second product which will roll out in a few weeks. D.C. area residents can sign up for Womply now here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Confirming earlier reports, luxury deals site Gilt City, a subsidiary of Gilt Groupe, Inc., is acquiring the assets of failed daily deals site BuyWithMe, after the latter saw massive layoffs following its failure to raise additional funding. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. Former members of BuyWithMe will now have access to all of Gilt’s offerings, including women’s, men’s and children’s apparel, plus accessories, home decor, travel experiences, and gourmet food and wine. During the transition period, BuyWithMe will carry out the sales previously scheduled in markets that Gilt City serves, and afterwards, members will continue to receive offers via Gilt City and Gilt Groupe. The acquisition will now allow Gilt City to expand further into its ten markets and expand quickly into new markets over the next year, Gilt City said in a statement. However, Gilt City will not operate in all of BuyWithMe’s markets after the transition is complete. BuyWithMe, said to be the third largest daily deals site behind Groupon and LivingSocial, previously operated in 13 markets in the U.S. with a customer base in the millions. It had raised around $21.5 million in venture capital from Boston VCs Bain Capital and Matrix Partners. (Reports from BetaBeat put the funding at $30 million). BuyWithMe began lay offs earlier this month, after having been unsuccessful in its attempts to grow its company through the acquisitions of other daily deals players. The company made its sixth acquisition in September, with its purchase of San Francisco-based TownHog. It previously acquired NYC’s Scoop St, Chicago deals site DealADayOnline, San Francisco deals site Swoop, loyalty company Edhance, and deals site LocalTwist. BuyWithMe’s domain is already redirecting to buywithme.giltcity.com/city, and lists the 13 combined markets BuyWithMe and Gilt City serve, including Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, L.A., Miami, New York, Philadelphia, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle and Washington D.C. BuyWithMe members can now access the site using their same username and password and can use their unused credit at Gilt Groupe, Gilt Taste, Park and Bond or Gilt City. Latest headlines delivered to you daily STELLAService, a customer service ratings provider for online retailers, is today announcing that it has raised $5 million in series A financing. The round was led by Battery Ventures, with participation from returning investors DFJ Gotham Ventures and RRE Ventures, as well as newcomer Forerunner Ventures.  Founded in 2009, STELLAService aims to help online shoppers make more informed purchasing decisions, while in turn providing online retailers with customer service data and insight as well as marketing services. Since April of this year, the number of retailers using the service has grown tenfold. Zappos, 1800Flowers, Wine.com, 1800Contacts, Gilt Groupe, and GNC are among the customers now displaying STELLA’s “seal of approval”.  To provide customers with a better sense of just how customer-service-friendly the retailers they patronize are, STELLAService goes out and does a little shopping itself. It pays for the products made by the companies it analyzes, using its staff of analysts to complete a thorough evaluation of the products and customer service offered by the makers of those products.  The analysts collect data and test the experience at all levels of the company’s online shopping experience, at which point they create a rating for the business, ranging from “elite” to, well, not so elite. The ratings are then posted on the site for all to see. Those companies that receive “elite” or “excellent” ratings get the STELLA stamp of approval and can show that off to their returning and would-be customers alike. The company said that it will use the capital to aggressively grow the business, build out its teamand ramp up product development. STELLAService raised a $2 million seed round in March of this year, bringing total investment to just north of $7 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As Erick wrote last week, SecondMarket, the marketplace for alternative investments, has been seeing quite a bit of activity of late. In fact, SecondMarket’s private stock transactions in the first three quarters of 2011 totaled $435 million, a 73 percent increase over the same period last year. SecondMarket lays out all these stats and more in its third quarter report, including the breakdown over who exactly is purchasing these shares. Interestingly, VCs made up less than 1 percent of transactions (and only 0.2 percent by dollar amount) last quarter. But, today, SecondMarket is announcing that it has received some serious outside investment of its own. The marketplace today closes a $15 million series C round, led by The Social+Capital Partnership, the new venture fund established by former Facebook VP Chamath Palihapitiya. The former Facebook and Aol VP will also be joining SecondMarket’s board of directors. The Social+Capital Partnership, which is focused on backing healthcare, education, financial services, and mobile companies, recently invested $17 million in enterprise social network, Yammer. “SecondMarket has become the preeminent platform for private company shares enabling companies to meet their liquidity needs, help retain and reward talent, and provide start-ups with an opportunity to monetize and grow their businesses”, Palihapitiya said in a statement.   For companies that are not yet ready to go public, SecondMarket has become one of the top alternatives, and has itself raised over $19 million to date from big-name investors like Li Ka-shing and Temasek. The series C investment not only brings the company’s total to $34 million, but raises its valuation to $200 million, according to the Wall Street Journal. The company will use the funding to ramp up hiring, expand beyond technology companies into new asset classes, and look for potential acquisitions. SecondMarket is also facing competition from Wall Street, as two firms, Cantor Fitzgerald & Co. and Liquidnet, have in the last few months both expanded their portfolios to include pre-IPO trading of shares.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Unthink, the social networking platform whose marketing campaign involves a lot of Facebook bashing, has reached 100,000 registered users, the company is now reporting. As you may recall, the site quickly crashed after TechCrunch sent its usual heavy stream of traffic to the network, and it took Unthink over a day to recover. Now the number of visitors to the site is doubling daily, including both active users and casual visitors. According to Rachael Vicari, Unthink COO, the company was unprepared for the amount of traffic it saw. The first two days sent the amount of visitors it expected to see over the first 90 days, she said, and they had to triple the number of servers to keep up. She also cites Alexia’s statistics, which report a 14,800% increase in traffic over the past 7 days alone. Tomorrow will be a week from launch, and since its public debut, 100,000 users have set up their own “Suites” on the network. (For background, Unthink user profiles, which involve a public, private and professional aspect, are called “Suites.”) Growth like this is impressive for an outsider to the typical startup scene (case in point: they didn’t know how much traffic TechCrunch sends!), and especially one that has the chutzpah to take on Facebook itself. Still, one has to wonder how many visitors are driven to the site out of sheer curiosity and disbelief, e.g.: Silly little startup, you think you can beat Facebook? Now that’s something I have to see!  Instead of touting week-old numbers, Unthink should check back in a month, a quarter, 6 months, then a year, and see whether or not the current growth trajectory holds up. User engagement is another important (and unanswered) question. Who’s actually participating on Unthink? How many of the 100,000 are friending users, posting updates, uploading content, etc.? Vicari says the reason for the growth is because “the time is right” for a network like this, but it’s far too soon to make that claim. For comparison’s sake, Facebook took a year to reach a million users, and Google+ reached 25 million in around a month’s time – something it took Facebook three years to achieve and which took Twitter over 30 months. Tampa-based Unthink has $2.5 million in funding from DouglasBay, which publicly claims to have a 21% share in the site. For more on what Unthink is up to, check out the previous review.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily You may not have heard of Tandem Entrepreneurs, the incubator and capital fund that officially launched in July, but for entrepreneurs focused on the mobile space, they’re worth checking out. What’s different about Tandem, as we wrote in July, is that founders Doug Renert and Sunil Bhargava don’t consider themselves VCs. Instead, they’ve brought together a host of entrepreneurs with decades of startup experience among them to provide resources in an incubator that specifically targets early-stage mobile startups.  The incubator works hand-in-hand with its founders on everything from strategy and product design to user acquisition and employee recruiting, seeding each company with $200,000 in a convertible note in exchange for 10 percent common equity.  Put simply, Tandem wants to become Silicon Valley’s mobile industry incubator and, as part of that mission, it’s today opening the doors of its collaborative workspace, called “The MobileHome”. The new digs in Burlingame will serve as a starter home to Tandem-backed companies, including the newest class of mobile startups that will be admitted in January 2012. Those interested in applying for the incubator’s winter class can apply here. The deadline is December 1st. Unlike other well-known incubators like Y Combinator and TechStars, Tandem hand selects and supports just a handful of entrepreneurial teams at a time. Out of over 1,000 applications received for its summer class, Tandem chose just three teams, all of which are working at the new site and will be attending the launch event in stealth mode. For its winter class, Tandem will be accepting 8 entrepreneurial teams; the small size of its classes, the incubator believes, help it deliver higher returns and success rates for its startups. Current startups participating in the incubator include Playhaven and Juice In The City. Tandem will be hosting a launch party for its new offices, and the first 20 TechCrunch readers can gain entry to the event by emailing info@tandemcap.com. For more on Tandem, check them out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily News360, the cross-platform news reader, is arriving on the iPhone today in version 2.0, after having been previously available on virtually all other platforms, including Android, the iPad, Windows Phone, the Web and even the BlackBerry PlayBook. With today’s launch, News360 is also adding support for logins, allowing you to sync your reading trends and behavior, (aka your “interest graph”) across devices. Support for Google+ has been added as well. For those unfamiliar, News360 is a news reading application with semantic underpinnings that uses smart algorithms to personalize your news reading experience. Upon installation, you connect your Facebook, Twitter, Evernote, Google Reader and now, Google+, accounts to the service, which helps it determine what sort of things you would find interesting. For casual news consumers, this is an easier way to personalize news as it doesn’t require you painstakingly fill out a list of “categories” you want to follow. Instead, the app makes suggestions, which you can add with a tap. The app faces fierce competition these days, especially from the likes of Flipboard, Pulse, Evri, News.me, AOL Editions, Zite and dozens of others.  While the underlying technology may be powerful, the app’s design, on the larger screen at least, was not as impressive. On the iPhone, however, the look is more utilitarian in parts, which may actually be a good thing. The company says that the app will also be included with Google TV in the updates that are rolling out this week. To date, News360 has seen 800,000 downloads across all devices. Corrected to clarify this is a major update, not a new app. Android was updated too. Latest headlines delivered to you daily New startup accelerator Advise.me has today formalized partnerships with the law firm Perkins Cole, plus Xero, Zendesk, GetSatisfaction, and SEOmoz all of which will provide services to its startup participants for free. The incubator, which is encouraging global entrepreneurs to apply to its program, has also just added eight more members to its team, including folks from GetSatisfaction, Facebook, Microsoft, Yammer, About.me, MetaLab, Posterous and Unitas Global. With the Perkins Cole partnership, Advise.me participants will be able to work directly with the firm for all their legal needs for free, not just for legal consultation. Advise.me also formalized partnerships with Xero, Zendesk, and GetSatisfaction to provide one year of service to the companies accepted, as well with SEOmoz, which will provide six months of its pro service, also for free.  The new team members include: Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDropbox Service Success and GrowthDropbox co-founder Drew Houston has one of the hottest startups in the game. With $257.2 million in funding and a $4-billion valuation it’s poised to triple an already impressive user base of 45-millon. So when did Houston know he was sitting on something pretty? Erick Schonfeld finds out in episode III of Drew Houston’s Founder Stories interview. Houston says there “were a couple of important inflection points.” The first occurred after Dropbox released a demo video that captured Y Combinator’s attention and helped Dropbox secure an invitation to join the exclusive startup program. Milestone two occurred a year later when Dropbox released a separate video on Digg during its private beta launch. In that second video, Houston says his team layered “easter eggs… aimed at the Digg audience” into the otherwise mainstream presentation. The splash of creativity worked. Within 24-hours Dropbox “had 75,000 people signup for the wait-list.” They were expecting 15,000, tops. Not wanting to risk testing a buggy product on all 75,000, Dropbox carefully screened who could kick around early versions by extending invites through “a Gmail style closed beta.”  Their strategy paid off. Just seven months after public launch Dropbox hit 1-million users. Roughly a year later they counted 10 million. With success in hand, Houston offers this advice to founders: “Research what other companies have done” but be cognizant of the fact that “often what works for one company is just completely the wrong thing for another company.” Make sure to check out the entire video for additional advice and watch episodes I and II of Houston’s interview with Schonfeld. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring Alexis Ohanian, Fred Wilson and Kevin Ryan are here. Episode IV of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Add this site to your bookmarks because I guarantee you, at some point, you’re going to need it. CanIStream.it is a new search engine that shows you where you can stream, rent, download and buy movies. The site checks the libraries at Netflix, Amazon, iTunes and Hulu and provides links to the appropriate listings. And if a movie isn’t available, you can sign up for CanIStream.it, set a reminder and the service will email you when the movie’s availability changes. The service is a side project from the team at UrbanPixels, a NY-based technology consulting, branding and design firm, who says they built the site because they were in need of something like this. (As were we all). Thanks to all the competing services, the ever-changing content deals between movie studios and streaming providers and the maddening decision by some studios to enforce a 28-day window between DVD releases and streaming availability, it’s hard to know what’s available where, in what format and when. But now you can just search CanIStream.it. There really isn’t much to using the service – you just enter a query and hit enter. Each search result has four icons: one for streaming, one for a digital rental, one for downloads and the last for where you can purchase the DVD. Click the link for the service where you want to view or buy the movie and you’re redirected there. That’s it. My only complaint? It would be nice if they added TV shows, too.  UrbanPixels Co-Founder Alex Petrescu says they’re not in it for the money – they just wanted to build a tool for the community to use. Thanks, guys.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile advertising Pontiflex is releasing an update to its AppLeads Smart SDK today, which brings its online “signup” platform to iOS5 devices and Android tablets, including the Kindle Fire. Previously, the system worked on older versions of iOS and Android smartphones. These signup ads are a different type of mobile advertising – one where the click-through is not the goal, but getting the customer to opt-in to hear more from the advertiser in question, is. Signup ads let customers interact with the ad without leaving the app. For now, that means entering in a zip code and email address, although Pontiflex is working on a version of the product that would introduce a social element to ads. For example, consumers could “like” the advertiser on Facebook or even share the ad with their friends. (Don’t laugh – some people really do share ads. Heck, some even blog about ads they like.) The possibility for social sharing increases when the advertiser is pitching a great deal, coupon, discount or sale, of course, which they likely would do. Pontiflex says it now has just under 1,000 applications running its ads on iOS and sees 4 million sign-ups per month. Some big-name advertisers are participating in the platform, including 1-800 Flowers, Southwest Airlines, Sak’s, Barney’s, Kimberly-Clark (Huggies) and others. As consumers interact with the ads, the algorithm, which takes into account 27 different types of signals, learns from that interaction, and guesses which ads the consumer would be most interested in seeing. Pontiflex is backed by New Atlantic Ventures, Tribeca Venture Partners and RRE Ventures. It has raised $14 million in funding to date. For a demo of AppLeads in action, go here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily D.C.-based Seva Search has raised $1.3 million in Series A funding for its first product, Seva Call, a search engine that lets consumers connect with local businesses in near real-time via the phone. On the Seva Call site (and soon, mobile app), you’ll be able to search for local businesses like plumbers, contractors, computer repair techs, taxi cabs or any other type of business relying on incoming phone calls for new work. To use the service, you’ll enter in the dates and times that are convenient to you, plus your name, phone number and a description of the service you need. Then, the businesses call you. Investors in the Series A round include Fortify.vc, Ed Mathias, Tim Sykes, Jay Virdy, David Eisner, Andrew Bachman, Jigar Shah, Krishna Subramanian, Vishal Gurbaxani, Arjun Dev Arora, Saket Saurabh, plus angels Paul Silber, David Krauskopf, John Lapides, Roger Richter, Glen Hellman and John Cammack. Badder Alghanim, James and David Dingman, Alex Edmans and John Villa were listed by the company as “supporters.” Seva Search was founded by Gurpreet Singh (CEO), Manpreet Singh (COO) and Amandeep Bakshi (Head of Products). Gurpreet Singh is a veteran entrepreneur, who previously served as Managing Partner in the I.T. consulting firm Geeks On-Site. Initially, the company found that trying to get businesses to sign up to participate in the service was difficult – they didn’t want to be pitched another place to advertise. So instead, the company’s founders just started sending them calls. Then, the businesses came to them instead, wanting to know more. Of those businesses that have a relationship with Seva Search, 1 in 4 companies will answer an incoming phone call. Of those that don’t, only 1 in 8 do. But the idea is not to call each business one by one – it’s to call all of them at once. Whomever answers first and who meets the consumer’s needs for the date and time (and, in the future, price), will be the business that ends up connecting with the customer. To ring the customer back, it’s just a matter of pushing a button. Meanwhile, the customer’s personal data (name, phone number, etc.) remains out of the businesses’ hands until they choose to give it to them. In time, by tracking calls, appointment bookings and other data, Seva Search’s algorithm will get smarter, learning which businesses to call first and when. It will also begin to follow up with customers about the work they had done, and ask them to rate it. Businesses are able to get the incoming requests via text and email, too, but need to dial Seva’s 1-800 number to reach the customers. Seva Call has been in private beta testing, but will be rolling out to the D.C. Metro area in a month, and nationwide by the beginning of 2012.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Traditional publishers and fledgling digital publications alike are trying to find the best ways to monetize their content on the Web and take advantage of the benefits offered by hyperlocal content and the targeted advertising that (should) come with it. PaperG, an advertising technology startup founded in 2007, is trying to become that go-to solution for small and established online publishers that are looking for a quick and easy solution for their hyperlocal advertising needs.  PaperG has built a solution that automates local ad creation, sales, and management for these online publishers that automatically creates a custom rich-media ad for any local business in less than 60 seconds, according to PaperG Founder and CEO Victor Wong. In August of last year, the startup added well-known publishers including the Los Angeles Times, MediaNews Group, Lee Enterprises, and Sun Times Media Group to its roster of publishing partners, which also includes names like Hearst, McClatchy, Gannett, New York Times Regional, Boston Globe, Newsday and New York Post. Today, the startup is announcing that it will be providing its local display advertising technology to another big player in the local news space: AOL Inc.’s hyperlocal platform of sites, Patch.com. (Disclosure: TechCrunch is owned by Aol.) PaperG’s technology will be released in over 100 of Patch’s markets, enabling Patch sales teams access instant ad creation, management, and optimization for their litany of local advertisers.  The value proposition here for Aol’s Patch is that PaperG’s technology, which supports Flash, HTML5, and mobile ad units, can automatically build a custom ad for any local business in a jiffy (an example of which you can check out to the right). All that a sales rep or advertiser needs is the business’ name and address, and PaperG’s solution crawls the Web, aggregating all the important info for the business, including reviews, location, etc., and presto, it creates a display ad without the sales rep having so much as to open a new tab. The key here, Wong says, is to supercharging sales and giving small newspapers and publishers an easy ad-creation platform without having to know how to code or create ad copy themselves. In the majority of situations, he says, the ad that’s created ends up being the final product, although teams then have the ability to tweak the design, color, ad copy, and so on, to complete the optimization process.   Wong says that PaperG wants local merchants to be able to target these ads as much as possible, through geo targeting, targeting by category, to enable small businesses to target the right audience and interest group the first time without the hassle. For merchants, the solution is absolutely free, and for publishers, the ability to avoid having to pay $50 for every ad that a solution creates is a huge leg up.  Thus, to make money, PaperG creates these commercial agreements, like the one it’s formed with Patch, to make its technology accessible to the variety of local outlets that are seeing syndicated content from the publisher. Those publishers have the opportunity to offer hyperlocal, targeted ads to an audience that is (they hope) far more likely to click on ad for their local pizza shop, which in turn makes those local businesses benefiting from this discounted advertising happy campers. And so far, the strategy seems to be working, as Wong says that it’s technology has been able to double the close rates for sales reps. While Google has a strong business with AdWords and is leading search engine advertising by a long shot, Wong says that no one is really doing this for local display advertising, which remains one of the largest white spaces in online advertising, he says. With a solution that simplifies local advertising for online publishers and the small businesses they represent, this PaperG’s strategy potentially has some legs. And considering the fact that Patch did its due diligence and considered a number of solutions before finally deciding to go with PaperG, the partnership is further confirmation that it they just might be onto something. PaperG raised $1.1 million from LaunchCapital, Brian O’Kelley, Mark Potts, and Steve Taylor back in December 2009. For more on the startup, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Matchbin, a company that creates CMS solutions and hosts websites for community newspapers, radio stations, and TV stations, announced today that it has acquired NAVTEQ Media Solution’s Radio and Television Group. The acquisition closes a $12 million credit facility with Silicon Valley Bank, and resulted in the creation of Radiate Media, which will offer localized content, digital CMSes and an advertising platform to local and national advertisers — among other things.  Chris Rothey, who founded Traffic.com and took it public before being acquired by NAVTEQ in 2007 (where he then became head of NAVTEQ Media Solutions), will become Radiate Media’s new CEO, while Hal Widlansky, previously the CEO of Matchbin, is to be Radiate Media’s new President and COO. Matchbin is also announcing today that it has closed its first institutional equity financing, which was led by New York-based growth equity investor, Level Equity. Greycroft Partners and vSpring Capital also participated as co-investors in the $10 million round.  Radiate Media will use the resources of Matchbin and NAVTEQ’s broadcast media group to continue providing content solutions to the radio and television space through an exclusive agreement with NAVTEQ, as well offer solutions like Matchbin’s “Editionals”, an iPad-focused CMS plaftorm for media partners — along with directory publishing platform and local SEO-optimized websites for merchants. NAVTEQ’s Media Solutions division was established to take advantage of its parent company’s strength in digital maps, which have driven 60 million navigation devices in the last decade, to provide location-enabled ad networks and mobile marketing solutions to both large and small publishers.  On the other side, since launching in January 2008, Matchbin has built a stable of over 700 local media partners, with aggregated website traffic seeing over 6 million unique visitors. Now, in conjunction with NAVTEQ Media Solutions’ Radio and TV Advertising Group, the newly formed Radiate Media can provide a bevy of web and mobile content apps and services to media partners, which will in turn offer merchants localized digital advertising and promotional tools to drive their businesses at a local level. Radiate Media will offer sponsorships of broadcast content to TV and radio advertisers, as well as giving them the opportunity to add a mobile element to broadcast campaigns with marketing services like SMS campaigns, original mobile websites and apps, etc. In addition, the company will be offering a top-down mobile marketing solution that includes creative strategy, campaign design, execution, and reporting. For more, check out Radiate Media at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Appcelerator, makers of the popular mobile cloud development platform Titanium, has raised $15 million in Series C funding in a round led by Mayfield Fund, Translink Capital and Red Hat. Existing investors eBay, Inc., Sierra Ventures and Storm Ventures also participated in the round. The additional funding will be used to expand Appcelerator’s Titanium product line, with an emphasis on adding HTML5 mobile Web capabilities to its offerings. It will also help the company expand operations in Europe and Asia. Appcelerator will be opening a U.K. office in Q1 2012 and is working with Translink, a firm with a strong Asian presence, to enter Japan, Korea and Greater China. According to Appcelerator VP of Marketing Scott Schwarzhoff, 40% of its developer base is North America, 40% is from Europe and the rest is “other.” So for Appcelerator, establishing a European office is mandatory, he says. The company also took the opportunity to provide an update on its growth. It now has 30,000 mobile applications on over 30 million mobile devices in its portfolio and 1.6 million developers in its ecosystem. This makes it if not the largest, then certainly one of the largest, mobile development platforms in existence today. More remarkable, perhaps, is how quickly the growth was achieved. The number of apps represents a 6-fold increase over 2010, the number of devices is a 12-fold increase over 2010, and the number of customers is a 10-folder increase, with the addition of 1,000 new customers in the past year. Some notable recent additions include NBC, eBay, Medtronic, GameStop, Merck, Progressive, Reuters and Harrah’s. The company has also grown from 17 employees to 100 over the past 12 months. Schwarzhoff says that around 30% of its customers are enterprise clients, and that number is growing. Another 30% are midsize companies, he adds. These clients increasingly want an integrated solution – one codebase that works across platforms, but not a “write once, deploy everywhere” solution. With Appcelerator, they take the “80/20” approach instead, meaning 80% is common code and 20% is unique to a given platform. This allows the publisher to take advantage of platform-specific features like Android’s intents, or iOS’s notifications. Going forward, that approach will continue on the backend, but on the UI side, Appcelerator is working on introducing more HTML5 capabilities through a new declarative UI which will allow it to compile the UI into a native UI. Appcelerator acquired Aptana in January to create a mobile IDE and just last week acquired competitor Particle Code, which focused on making games compatible across mobile platforms. Red Hat, an Appcelerator investor, also partnered with the company in May, making it the first mobile app development platform to be a part of Red Hat’s OpenShift Platform-as-a-Service. Including its Series A and B rounds, Appcelerator has now raised $31.5 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post is by Justin Kan, cofounder of Justin.tv and TwitchTV. You can follow him on Twitter and read his blog. Everyone knows there’s a war going on today in Silicon Valley: a war for talent. Startups are competing for a limited supply of engineering and product design labor, largely constrained by the failure of the US to invest in STEM education and a terribly restrictive immigration process for work visas. Meanwhile, big companies like Facebook and Google are paying out millions to either retain or rehire engineers through talent acquisitions. This system is under even more pressure from seed funds (Sorry: I’m a part-time partner at Y Combinator, so I’m probably contributing to the problem). Not only do you have to worry about your engineers going to your competition, you have to worry about them getting seeded to run off and start their own company. It’s often hard to compete against the “grass is greener” dream of being a founder, especially when the theoretical upside of doing your own thing is nearly infinite and there are investors ready to write you a convertible note check today. No cap necessary! If you want to attract and retain the best talent, you’re going to have to work hard at it. Here are a few lessons I’ve learned in the past couple months: 1) Have a vision When our main product was JustinTV, no one wanted to work at our company. Well, that’s a slight exaggeration, but few talented engineers said to themselves “Oh my god! My dream has always been to work at a general live video platform: you guys are the perfect fit!” We hired several talented people, but mostly because we were a YC company, had a few interesting technology scaling challenges and we seemed really cool. When we launched TwitchTV, a community around broadcasting and watching video gaming, everything changed. We started to get a LOT more inbound candidates: it turns out the overlap between programmers and pro-gamers is pretty high. We had a new vision to bring competitive gaming to the masses, and there are many people out there who share that vision and want to be a part of making that world a reality. By communicating a vision that harnesses the passions of a certain group of people, we tapped into a talent pool we wouldn’t otherwise have had access too. 2) Be the only option If you want a job as a programmer at a social media site, all you have to do is walk down the street in San Francisco waving your front-end engineer resume and you’ll be employed in 30 seconds. The competition to be the best social network, photo sharing platform, event discovery engine, or Facebook for X is fierce… and everyone is losing to Facebook. I remember reading an Elon Musk interview where he claimed that if you were an engineer that wanted to innovate in rocketry or electric cars, there really wasn’t anywhere else to work but Space X or Tesla. Consequently, they attract the top engineering talent in those industries. For every industry, there are some set of talented people who are passionate about innovating and solving the difficult problems. If you’re the company that happens to be innovating and solving difficult problems, then you’re going to end up the the default “Best place to work in X.” My recommendation: pick an industry where that title will be possible to achieve. 3) Create a cult The buzz over perks, salary and fancy benefits wears off. Every time you give someone a raise or new title, she feels good… for a week. Soon after, it settles in and becomes a new baseline, and worse still it becomes leverage for her to get a higher paying job somewhere else. Instead, focus on providing an environment that builds community within your company. Often heard example: provide company lunches. It isn’t just efficient, but it increases opportunities for serendipitous discussion over meal times and employees will be more likely to become friends. The more friends at a company, the more enjoyable the job and the more you want to stay where you are. My friend Matt Brezina’s company, Sincerely, creators of postcard sharing app Postagram, goes beyond that. The entire company takes week-long workcations in Mexico. They heavily recruit within social circles and when a candidate flies in for an interview they will put him up in an Airbnb in a neighborhood he would be likely to live, and the team will spend the weekend hanging out with him. By building a sense of family, you build lasting connections between your employees that will keep them motivated and around. — Your talented team is the most vital part of any startup. The way to retain the best talent is by having a clear vision, working in an area where you’re the only company and creating a place where people connect with each other. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in November of 2009, former Digg Chief Architect Joe Stump and Social Thing founder Matt Galligan first publicly unveiled their new startup, SimpleGeo, which was slated to become the new infrastructure for location-based services. They called it the “Amazon Web Services” for location, offering products that make it easy for developers to build location-enabled web and mobile apps, including storage, context, API features, and polymaps. Less than a year later, in March 2010, SimpleGeo was closing in on a terabyte of geodata stored, had grown their staff to 13, and launched officially to the public. A year later, the startup initiated their “grand unveiling”, which revealed what they’d been focused on over the last year, which was SimpleGeo Storage: A hosted database that allows developers to store and retrieve location data. And since it was hosted, it allowed developers to outsource their infrastructural issues issues and was distributed using Cassandra, so there’s no single point of failure. But, then in August, SimpleGeo Co-founder Matt Galligan decided to step down, deciding to take some time off to do his own thing as well as become a West coast advisor to the TechStars incubator and launch 1% of Nothing, which asks founders to give 1 percent of their earnings to charity in the case of a liquidity event. Well, SimpleGeo now has that opportunity, as Mike Arrington reports that SimpleGeo has been acquired by Urban Airship for approximately $3.5 million. In July, the two companies formed a strategic partnership which was intended to, put simply, provide better ways for developers to offer location-aware push notifications in their applications. Geo-targeted notifications were expected to be a big source of revenue for both startups, but it seems that it just made more sense for the companies to move forward as one rather than as two separate entities. SimpleGeo has raised $10 million in outside investment since 2009, with its first angel seed round including quite a few big names like Ron Conway, Kevin Rose, Chris Sacca, Timothy Ferriss, Shawn Fanning, and Gary Vaynerchuk. Urban Airship, which was founded at about the same time as SimpleGeo, has itself raised $6 million to date from the Foundry Group and True Ventures  to make it easier for mobile app developers to offer push notifications. As Mike points out, this is indeed a “soft landing” for SimpleGeo and most of the proposed cash will likely go towards paying off the last round of investors. It seems a low exit for a startup that was once very promising, especially as it is being led by current CEO and serial entrepreneur Jay Adelson. It also remains to be seen what Urban Airship will be doing with that terabyte-plus of data SimpleGeo has in stock.  SimpleGeo has confirmed in a blog post here — as has Urban Airship. Scott Kveton, the CEO of Urban Airship, will remain the Big Kahuna, and Jay Adelson, Matt Galligan, and Joe Stump will join as advisors. Urban Airship, Kveton tells me, has seen revenue grow 600 percent in 2011, has a team of 38, which will now become 51. The teams will be meeting this week to discuss plans for the future and finalize the acquisition. But Kveton said that Urban Airship, as a Portland-based company, is excited to establish a presence in the Bay Area. And with the businesses bearing so much resemblance, it was a “natural extension” for Urban Airship. Kveton declined to comment on numbers, but all signs point towards $3.5 million being, at least, in the ballpark. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile marketing platform Appsfire is launching a new ad unit for iPhone that lets app developers promote the applications they’re about to launch. The “Coming Soon” ad doesn’t just announce the forthcoming applications, however, but can also gather early sign-ups from potential users through its “notify me” button. According to Appsfire Co-founder Ouriel Ohayon (and former editor of TechCrunch France), most app developers wait until their app has launched before they start marketing it, when really they should start before. I have to agree with him there – after all, the formula is pretty successful for all the startups we cover here, which often promote their soon-to-launch services via landing pages from LaunchRock or KickOffLabs, for instance. Why shouldn’t mobile app developers do the same? The new ad unit, which functions sort of like a trailer for mobile apps, includes a full screen preview, a few visuals and the above-mentioned “notify me” button. Users can be notified both by push messages and via email, depending on their preference. On the backend, Appsfire tracks the application in real-time so it knows when the app goes live and then handles the automatic notification process. The ad unit was launched into private beta testing a few weeks ago, with Tinyco, Capcom Labotec, UsTwo, Metamoki and others as testers. Early results have been good, says Ohayon, with up to 30% CTR on the “notify me” button. The company is now working on bringing the same ad unit to Android and will be making it available for use in other apps (not just AppsFire). The unit may also be expanded to support the collection of beta testers. AppsFire raised $3.6 million in Series A funding earlier this year and is now listed as a top 15 free app on iTunes.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Mark Hendrickson is a former TechCrunch writer turned entrepreneur who is filling in to cover Startup School as a guest writer. If you’ve ever met Paul Graham and Jessica Livingston of Y Combinator (YC), you quickly realize that the incubator they run is like a family and they are its attentive parents. They have managed to put a very human face on venture capital, one that appeals to young engineers during their most insecure stage: when they have just begun, or are still deciding whether to begin, their lives as entrepreneurs. Much of their success in establishing YC as the premier gateway for startups in Silicon Valley can be attributed to this characteristic and its manifestations. When these engineers think about venturing out on their own, they turn to YC as a sort of foster home, one that will shelter them during the first few rough months of startup life and prepare them for the scary world beyond. Because of this, YC has secured a nice deal flow for itself, one that allows it to evaluate a massive amount of raw talent before it transforms into validated companies commanding higher valuations and greater sums of money. As the gateway to Silicon Valley – and truly, you’d be hard pressed to think of another singular starting point for this community’s entrepreneurs (there’s a reason Ron Conway calls it the “Harvard/Stanford of startups”) – YC has decided not only to open its doors to budding entrepreneurs but to actually encourage more undecided youth to become entrepreneurs. This is the raison d’être for Startup School, an annual event that YC holds at Stanford (and which took place again this past Saturday). A large crowd of fresh-faced engineers fills an auditorium for eight hours to collect pearls of wisdom from notable technologists like Mark Zuckerberg, Max Levchin and (not ironically) Ashton Kutcher. And they walk away feeling more confident about starting companies themselves, and not coincidentally, leaning towards opting for YC to do it. Seen in a common light, this is a win-win for everyone involved. Entrepreneurs get to drink from a firehose of advice, manned by people who they already admire or soon will. YC gets an increased number of applicants and from that larger pool can invest in a greater number of promising startups. Later-stage investors consequently see more promising deal flow coming out of YC, and consumers benefit from the wonderful products that are created by companies that may otherwise not have been founded. All the while, the press and public at large gets to enjoy the appearance of more Silicon Valley success stories, which simultaneously satisfies and fuels their desire for role models of the American Dream. But there’s a flipside to the event’s impact, one that’s perhaps harder to see if you haven’t stuck around Silicon Valley for some time and observed how the overall system works. Such an instigation of entrepreneurship leads to (surprise) more entrepreneurs, but more entrepreneurs without a certain qualification may not be a necessarily good thing, either for those new entrepreneurs or the people who are affected by them. In a very fundamental sense, the supply of entrepreneurs is this industry’s lifeblood and, as with any supply, its not only quantity but quality that counts. Now, before you get upset and call me elitist, let me take you through some of the things that folks on stage actually said about this to illustrate what I mean by qualification and how it’s not reliant on past experience or expertise. Over the course of the event, there was an interspersed refrain from the speakers that many entrepreneurs aren’t motivated by a consistent passion or purpose. Mark Pincus spoke about how his concern that many founders look towards investors for approval before determining whether they have ideas worth pursuing instead of getting excited about ideas for their own sake. He also suggested that many lack big macro goals to inform their decisions, and as a consequence, fall into the trap of making constant compromises and losing excitement for their work. Mark Zuckerberg ruminated openly about how he’s concerned that many people are more interested in the idea of being an entrepreneur and building a company than solving a particular problem or fulfilling a particular passion. He explained how he believed there’s a culture of starting companies before one knows what they want to do and without knowing one’s passion. For his part, he recalls the establishment of Facebook as a company as a reluctant process wherein he was compelled to do it first and foremost by a passion for online identity and connectivity. This train of thought even led him to suggest that he might have kept Facebook in Boston were he to start over again, although he meant this less as a nod to Boston than as a statement on how companies built outside of Silicon Valley have a “longer term cadence”. Other speakers touched on this idea as well. Ashton Kutcher spoke about how a switch often turns off in his mind when entrepreneurs are pitching him and quickly jump from the problem they are trying to solve to who they’re looking to be and what they’re looking to get. To him, many are more obsessed with being the next Zuckerberg, Pincus or Jobs than making a difference in the world. Jim Goetz of Sequoia Capital noted similarly that entrepreneurs ought to spend more time in the idea phase, honing in on a unique and compelling point of view before trying to build a company around it. And Max Levchin argued that starting a company requires an entrepreneur to be unemotional about every aspect of it except their passion for the product. Paul Graham himself echoed these sentiments mid-day by explaining how he believed the best startup ideas come from problems, not people looking for ideas. He implored the audience to start with a desire and then find an idea rather than compiling ideas from TechCrunch, as he sees many entrepreneurs doing in their applications to YC. He then went on, not coincidentally, to tear down the ideas of several entrepreneurs who presented to him on stage during a mock “office hours” session, as if to illustrate his preconception that many, if not most, entrepreneurs haven’t yet figured out a problem worth solving. If this is the case, then, that we are experiencing a generation of entrepreneurs who prioritize the phenomenon of entrepreneurship over its justification, we ought to be concerning ourselves as a community with teaching folks not only how to get into the entrepreneurship game but how to find their purpose as well. This is a tricky proposition, and I don’t mean to suggest that people should hold out from starting a company before they have an “ah ha!” moment. Nor do I mean to suggest that a purpose will ever suddenly click into place for most or virtually any entrepreneurs; this is perhaps the most important lesson we’ve learned from the lean startup movement, that the discovery of problems and their solutions is often an iterative process. But what I am suggesting is that, in addition to the commonly recited mantras intended to help entrepreneurs execute (such as fail fast, be persistent, focus on product above all else, prioritize engineering, surround yourself with “A” players, etc.), we should develop and promote a more deliberate practice of discovering passions worth pursuing and problems worth solving in a less haphazard way. This effort would certainly not be easy or clear from the onset, and it may require fundamental changes to our educational system in addition to our configuration as a community. But without it, institutions like YC and its Startup School will likely continue receiving and channeling ever-more entrepreneurs who may be well-versed in tactics but who lack anchoring values that drive their efforts. And that will be a shame not only for those individuals but the investors and customers who await the fruits of their labor, which otherwise could have amounted to so much more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s Halloween, so it’s the perfect day to unveil the newest group of 500 Startups’ “little monsters”. Yes, this is the name that founder Dave McClure and his partner in crime Christine Tsai give to all the rock star entrepreneurs that grace the halls of their Mountain View offices. 500 Startups, as you may have heard by now, is the early-stage seed fund and incubator program founded in 2010 by the globe-trotting angel investor, which seeds between $25K to $250K in each of its startups that meet its “Three Ds” criteria: Design, data, and distribution. The fall batch kicked off on October 10 and includes 34 awesome startups, which makes this its largest roster to date (the initial batch consisted of 12 startups and the second came in at 21, bringing 500 Startups’ total to 174).  The breakdown of this batch’s demographics shows this to be a diverse group of companies, as 8 of the startups have female founders: 72Lux, DressRush, Gizmo, LoveWithFood, MeMeTales, Talkdesk, Tiny Review, WeddingLovely, and fifteen of the startups have international founders (UK, Croatia, Canada, Brazil, Netherlands, Australia, Portugal, Bulgaria, Estonia, Russia, Japan). There’s also some good geographical distribution in the U.S., as the majority of this batch hails from outside of Silicon Valley, with teams from Chicago, Denver, Seattle, Los Angeles, New York City, Washington DC, Boston, and more among its ranks.  Two of the companies, TinyReview and WeddingLovely, have also received investments from Designers Fund, which, for those unfamiliar, is a community of designers that invests in design-experienced founders through mentorship, angel funding, and network access. Designers can also apply for investment, much in the same way founders apply to AngelList. The “Demo Days” for this batch of startups has not yet been confirmed, but we do know that they will take place sometime in January 2012. It should also be noted that, in the spirit of Halloween, the third batch of 500 Startups companies is not only made up primarily of zombies, but it also appears that part of the strict regimen of business plan-building and product-honing also includes instruction in the fine art of dance. Thrilling, thrilling dance.  These 34 startups will give a more complete peek into their various products and plans to take over the world at 500 Startups’ Demo Days in January, but for those of you who are too antsy to wait until then, here’s a sneak preview below in alphabetical order: 300milligrams is a priority inbox for team conversations. The team hails from Estonia, which just so happens to be a country with a disproportionate number of startups per capita. 72Lux offers consumers a universal checkout and personalizedshopping experience while also offering a white-label version for publishers. (It also appears that 72Lux is currently in 500 Startups’ fall batch as well as First Growth Networks’ fall 2011 class, but maybe they’re just that good.) BrandBoards is bringing Google Adwords simplicity and reach to live event digital advertising. BrightNest is the Mint.com for home maintenance, helping homeowners manage their most valuable asset with customized tips and reminders. Cadee helps golfers understand and improve their game. Central.ly wants to connect all of the social media profiles for small business owners. Chorus is customer feedback without the hassle. It automatically extract meaning from thousands of customer messages as they arrive in real time. ContaAzul is a web-based, SaaS accounting system for Brazilian SMBs. Contactually is a personal assistant for your professional email contacts that connects directly with your CRM. DressRush (“Gilt for Weddings”) wants to make “bridezillas” everywhere clamor to get couture without the cost. Up to 100% off retail. eSpark Learning is “Pandora for education”, creating custom playlists of fun education apps on iPads for elementary school students. Farmeron is a Croatian startup that helps farmers across the world to manage their production data online and to do automatized farm performance analysis using exciting statistics. Fileboard is a service accessed from the iPad that helps manage files and attachments across email, Dropbox, Evernote, and other cloud repositories. Fitocracy turns fitness into an addictive gaming experience where you level up in real life. (Check out TC’s early coverage of Fitocracy here.) Forrst is where developers and designers improve their craft and companies come to hire them. Gizmo is a cloud-based multichannel marketing platform for mobile, tablet, social, and the Web. GoVoluntr is a social platform that brings together volunteers, nonprofits, and businesses to solve today’s social problems. Hapyrus offers the easiest way of leveraging Hadoop to make your system highly scalable. HighScore House turns a child’s chores and boring routines into a game, making the lives of families a little less hectic and a little more fun. Intercom lets web businesses build powerful, personal relationships with their users, turning them into loyal customers. LookAcross is a sales productivity tool helps you to have more conversations and up your connect rates by improving your company’s odds of connecting with people. LoveWithFood, is the easiest way to find culinary deals & samples, curated by a community of foodies for foodies. Like Tom’s shoes for food, with every deal served, LoveWithFood donates a meal. Meloncard wants to keep your personal information private and out of the hands of the companies that sell it. MeMeTales is a mobile game and reading platform for kids. “Fun like Angry Birds without the guilt”. MoPix wants to define what the movie experience can be on tablet devices and make distribution accessible to anyone with film or video content. OneSchool is a free mobile app that connects students to the people, places, and things around them. PayByGroup wants to make it so that you never have to front money for your group purchases again. The startup coordinates your friends’ payments to the merchant so you can plan activities without the hassle. Redeemr helps businesses and celebrities get un-ignored by their social media fans. RotaDosConcursos is a Brazilian test prep service designed to get users into those coveted government positions. Spinnakr simplifies website targeting and increases your click-throughs and conversions by automatically displaying the right message to the right visitor. Switchcam recreates the concert experience by combining and syncing fan-recorded videos. Talkdesk lets your company have a contact center in the browser. It provides information about the caller by integrating with services like Salesforce and Zendesk. Tiny Review is “Instagram for Yelp reviews”, or a fast and fun way to say what you think about a place. WeddingLovely is building tools and directories to promote small and independent wedding vendors. One of the best parts of becoming a 500 Startups company is its strong list of advisors and mentors, which you can check out here. Not to mention the fact that more than 50 percent of its first batch raised at least $250K, two raised a million or more, and every startup finished with some money in their pockets. For more McClure on why 500 Startups is like the Oakland A’s of seed-stage investing, compared to Sequoia as the Yankees, check out Alexia’s interview here, or for seven of the most interesting startups from the accelerator’s last batch, check out our coverage here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Is Tumblr facing a growing spam problem? For many regular users of the blogging platform, the answer is “yes.” Although Tumblr hasn’t taken to its own blog to provide a public update on its progress in fighting spam, it did recently address the concerns of a high-profile Tumblr user – the associate producer of NPR’s Fresh Air, Melody Kramer, who maintains a blog for the popular program hosted on the Tumblr platform. To Kramer, Tumblr acknowledged that it’s aware of a recent increase in spam blogs and is “doing everything we can to quickly suspend these blogs and to keep more of them from being created.” Last week, a post by Croatian blogger Sven Duplić about the percentage of Tumblr users that are spam bots sparked a discussion both in the comments section as well as on Hacker News. (BetaBeat has a good summary of this). The takeaway is that for some Tumblr users, the issue is worse than it is for others. But for NPR’s Fresh Air, the problem was bad enough to prompt Kramer to post a snarky message to Tumblr spammers earlier this month, perhaps as a way to get Tumblr itself to step in and address the problem: Dear Tumblr Spammers, If you’re going to follow Fresh Air and then like 30 of the posts, why not like the most recent posts? If you’re simply trying to get people to find their way to your page, liking posts from last February — all in a row — probably won’t help. Yours truly, Mel Tumblr has now replied to the issue, essentially confirming it’s aware of the growing spam problem and is doing everything it can to fight it. The full message reads: Hello, Melody. Please know that we’re aware of a recent increase in blogs with odd URLs that are following large numbers of users. We’re doing everything we can to quickly suspend these blogs and to keep more of them from being created. As Tumblr finds and suspends these blogs, you may see that your Followers count seems incorrect for a period of time. Our Follower indexing system time to recognize that a given blog has been suspended and to then not count that suspended blog in your Followers count. We’ll update your Followers count correctly after a period of time. The fact that one or more of these blogs has Followed you, Reblogged your content, or Liked your content will not compromise the security of your Tumblr account or the security of your computer in any way. If you’d like, you can Block any blogs that are causing you concern. Blocking does not prevent someone from showing up as Follower or prevent them from viewing a public blog’s web pages or RSS feed. But you can use http://tumblr.com/block so that they can’t see your posts on their Dashboard, you don’t see them listed in post notes or in Dashboard notifications, and you don’t get Messages from them. We are sorry that this issue has occurred and are doing everything that we can to address it quickly. Please let us know if you have further questions or concerns. Unfortunately, for Kramer and the rest of Tumblr’s user base, the issue may not be as simple as spammers just sneaking in links to their sites via the platform’s liking system, although that’s the most visible problem. Spammers typically use the Tumblr “like” button to create backlinks to their sites by creating hundreds or thousands of fake Tumblr accounts that go around “liking” other people’s Tumblr posts. It’s not all that different from the problem where spammers infiltrate blog commenting systems to link to their sites, or the now nearly discarded system of using Trackbacks to indicate when someone else has linked to your post from theirs. (Trackbacks, popular in the early days of blogging, became so overrun by spammers, that today, most bloggers just shut them off.) Tumblr’s growth, certainly, has been remarkable. In September, it raised $85 million in new funding, bringing its total funding to over $125 million. But it’s unclear when the company talks about its “30 million blogs” with “40 million posts per day,” what percentage of those are being created by spammers. Even more importantly, perhaps, is that spammers on Tumblr aren’t just using the platform to build backlinks – it some cases, their Tumblr profiles even contain a payload, like a link to a malicious piece of malware. Here’s one example, uncovered by shortformblog, who found bit.ly links hidden in the source code of a suspect Tumblr profile which pointed to a rogue Flash file download. If clicking through to Tumblr profiles could lead to malware infections on your PC, then Tumblr has a serious problem on its hands, much worse than the annoyance of likespam and shady SEO tactics. Of course, uncovering how widespread the malware problem may be requires source code checks and analysis best left up to security researchers. That being said, it goes to follow that where there’s spam, there’s malware. Hopefully, Tumblr will use its new funding to quickly and efficiently address this issue before it becomes much worse. Update: As a part of the crackdown, it looks like Tumblr is adding ref=nofollow on its like links now. (Note: this is not an official confirmation from the company).      Image credits: shortformblog Latest headlines delivered to you daily October 31 - November 1, 2011						 |China National Convention Center (CNCC), Beijing, ChinaFacebookLinkedInShakr Media at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011You run a news outlet. A big news story has broken, and you need a video now. Even if you’ve got a dedicated video staff, the research, editing, and encoding on the video is going to take at least an hour. By the time you’ve got it all exported and uploaded, it’s anything but breaking news. Disrupt Beijing Battlefield competitor Shakr (not to be confused with the Disrupt SF 2011 champ and digital discoteca Shaker) aims to lop out all of that manual labor and wasted time. By algorithmically pulling in information, photos, and video snippets from around the web, Shakr automatically creates video clips as the news breaks. When a news story hits, Shakr begins parsing web articles for details as they’re written. Simultaneously, it’s digging around the web for related images and videos. The news publisher hops into Shakr’s editing tool, confirms the details of the story they wish to highlight and the photos they want to include, then taps the finish button. When the final product comes out of the oven, it’s complete with synthesized voice narration and incredibly snazzy visual transitions.FacebookLinkedInShakr Media at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Shakr’s videos are built on WebGL. While that limits platform compatibility for the time being, it (at least theoretically) works out to nigh-universal compatibility as more browsers find their WebGL wings.  While Shakr’s primary distribution channel will be through media partners (with ads strapped on as the business model), Shakr will also launch a web video portal of their own (pictured in the gallery below). We’ll add a video of this segment (complete with a example of one of Shakr’s auto-built videos) to this post shortly. Sadly, we’ve gotta do all of that aforementioned encoding/uploading stuff first. (Update: Added! See above.) This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInNextGoals at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011NextGoals is an app that attempts to motivate the lethargic to exercise and stay fit. How does it work? By asking you to work out and then verifying that you actually rolled off the couch and out to the gym. The system uses a device called the G-Band. It is a pedometer worn on the wrist and gives you real-time data on your PC and phone. You can gauge your progress over time and you can also connect with friends and family via various social networks. The dashboard is quite clean and clever and it sends out status updates based on your current activities. You can also work with your friends to get more fit using NextGoals’ collaboration tools. When compared to other health trackers, the G-Band is fairly compelling. First, it is only $29 and much cheaper than any other mini tracking device. They are aiming the product at China immediately and may move overseas later. They are also partnering with gyms in the country. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInChaopin at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Stepcase, the Hong Kong based-startup behind the 7.5 million-strong photo community Step.ly, is launching a photo viewer tailored for Sina Weibo, named Chaopin to provide users with consistent, intuitive and light-weight photo-viewing experience. According to Leon, founder of Stepcase, the idea of creating Chaopin stems from an experimental concept to create, design and develop an app in just two weeks to meet Chinese users’ needs of browsing Weibo pictures. The Chaopin team holds a unique perspective on the China market, which can be boiled down to a few theories. First and foremost, the busy city life keeps Chinese people from taking photos in the same way that people in the West do. Second, cities are sprawling and those who regularly access social media have less interest to take/share photos. Third, people like to consume and re-share photos. The application is designed to aggregate fashion photos and arranges the photos into popular and new streams. When the app is started, Chaopin collects fashion photos shared from Sina Weibo and renders the images into a photo collage so that users do not have to scroll through pages and pages of text, or through multitudes of accounts. Tapping on a photo brings it up in full screen where it is easy to flick through all the photos frompage to page. Chaopin also allows people to create personalised collections and to store and arrange their favourite fashion and apparel photos into collections which they can browse or reference later when they are out shopping, or shopping online. It is also possible toget more information about the photo and interact with the photo creator by tapping the follow button or tapping on the photo creators name. The Chaopin team also realized that viewing street fashion photos seemed quite popular among Weibo adopters even though the viewing experience isn’t that pleasant. That’s why they came up with the idea of curating an application that makes it a beautiful experience to browse street fashion photos posted or shared on Weibo. The application also allows you to discover and follow the people who are sharing these photos, rate the photos hot or not, see the hottest photos, and re-share them all on Sina Weibo. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily October 31 - November 1, 2011						 |China National Convention Center (CNCC), Beijing, ChinaI’m the sort of person who likes to buy things online. Batteries? Yup. Groceries? You bet. And I just bought a garbage can that opens automatically when you get close to it (magic!). But there’s one big area where online shopping has always fallen short: clothes shopping. If you’ve ever tried ordering a shirt or jeans off the web, then you know the feeling — the site says it’s a medium, but you’re not sure if you should move up to the large instead. And then when the shirt actually arrives, you find that it drapes in all the wrong ways and looks vaguely like a poncho. Even when there’s free return shipping, it’s still a pain to get another size. If only there were a better way. UPcloud is a new startup launching today at TC Disrupt Beijing, and it thinks it has it.FacebookLinkedInBattlefield, 2nd Session IntroThe company is doing something that many of us have wished for: it uses your computer’s webcam to size you up, then recommend clothing that will fit you well. You calibrate the service by standing in front of a camera and holding a CD (which have a consistent shape). Then you can shop across any of the sites that have integrated UPcload. Each site gives UPcload size information about each item, which is matched against your fit profile. The question, then, is whether it really works. Our first tests were promising, and the site already has one major vote of confidence: it’s currently in testing with The North Face. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInYuwan at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Getting folks to check into apps is hard. But what would happen if we could automatically check into events – like TV shows – automatically? Today at TechCrunch Disrupt Beijing, a Chinese team is trying to take the check-in business into a whole new level. Founded in September 2011, Yuwan is an application that lets TV viewers check into their favorite TV programs or even commercials and then share them on social media platforms such as Sina Weibo. The Beijing-based startup employs an unique SoundPrint technology to record, analyze and label TV programs. That’s how the app can recognize what you’re currently watching as it “listens” to your TV set.The Yuwan team said that television penetration in China is over 97% while TV programs-related discussions are amongst the top-five trendy topics on Chinese social media. But for a long time was no such thing in China that allowed coach potatoes to share and comment on shows they love and watch together.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily October 31 - November 1, 2011						 |China National Convention Center (CNCC), Beijing, China			  My first thought as I looked at 8 Securities, a new startup launching today at TC Disrupt Beijing, was, “I didn’t know financial dashboards could look sexy.” But that’s exactly what the Hong Kong-based startup has done: it’s built a service that combines elements of StockTwits, E*Trade, and iGoogle’s personalization to allow users to build a largely customized web interface for absorbing financial information and dealing with trades. Users can add widgets containing graphs, stock tickers, video streams, and other content, which they can arrange in whatever way they’d like. In addition to facilitating trades, the service also has a social component that allows investors to interact with each other — the company says it’s looking to break the mold of so-called one way advisor models by allowing investors to ask each other questions, and to syndicate their tips to social networks if they’d like.FacebookLinkedIn8 Securities at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011The company will initially be launching in Hong Kong, where they say there is a market of 1.2 million online brokerage accounts, and will be expanding further into China as regulations allow them to. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInAnquanbao at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Anquanbao is a cloud-based software program that helps protect websites from security violations like malware and denial of service attacks. Its product can be easily installed on any website. All that the administrators need to do is change his or her domain settings. Since abusive bots and crawlers waste bandwidth and server resources, Anquanbao’s product also helps websites load faster.Anquanbao service is freemium, and it offers free service and provides value-added services to the mid-end and high-end users who have more security and performance needs. It is like CoudFlare but it more focus on Chinese sites.“China has more than 2 million websites, 1 percent of which could be expected to pay for the security service,” the founder of Anquanbao said at TechCrunch’s Battlefield Beijing, “There are more than 200 thousand governmental websites must be protected.” According to the founder, the market size is expected more than 3 billion RMB (~500 million USD). Q&A Q: Who are your customers? A: Enterprise, from small to big ones. Q: How could you convince the IT staff of your customer with your credibility and trust? A: We don’t install any software into customer’s system and we bring experts who help work on the hard stuff for those IT staff.       Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInOrder With MeFounded by husband and wife team Jonathan and Danielle Jenkins, OrderWithMe is a group buying site specifically designed for the small Western businesses who are having trouble navigating the somewhat unintelligible world of Chinese manufacturers. By allowing companies to buy in bulk, OrderWithMe can offer the same deals that larger retailers get, which means up to 70% discounts on fashion and furniture items. Co-founder Jenkins came up with the idea for OrderWithMe when — as a merchant himself — he realized that bulk, factory-level information from sites like Alibaba was of little help to an American small business. Instead of a choice of 35K handbags, Jenkins needed something that would narrow down inventory selection to only the hundred most popular. OrderWithMe differentiates itself from Alibaba by offering a skill that is increasingly more valuable, a crash course in “how to handle China” for Americans; “We understand the value of providing customer service when ordering inventory from Chinese factories,” Jenkins says. “The market for wholesale is so fragmented in America. It’s so difficult to know where to get it and who to trust. And [with OrderWithMe] you can talk to an American customer sales rep who knows exactly what you need. ” Targeting middle America through trade shows and niche conferences, OrderWithMe has already handled 100K in transactions. Jenkins also reveals that he’s had large Chinese importers approach OrderWithMe as well as seen demand from smaller businesses in order verticals like party stores. Jenkins holds that what sets OrderWithMe apart from other SMB  deals services like Busy Deals is that no one site doing physical inventory and merchandise. The company monetizes by taking a cut of a markup on the product after it leaves the factory and because OrderWithMe holds no inventory, there is no inventory risk if sale doesn’t tip it doesn’t tip. “We don’t have the risk of not being able to sell,” Jenkins said. After their launch at Disrupt, OrderWithMe plans on offering a few small businesses a free OrderWithMe  starter package of $50K worth of retail inventory to help businesses struggling in a rough economy, “We’re wanting to help other people who are having a hard time and make things a little bit easier.” OrderWithMe presently has $250K of angel funding and the nine person team (with six Americans and two Chinese employees) is run out of Hangzhou, China.  Judges Q&A Q: Sounds like you’re trying to bridge two worlds? How do scale this? A: We’re not looking to add 1000s of categories and 1000s of products we’re starting at what we know. Q: How do you keep SMB happy when orders aren’t being met. A: We’re starting niche, fashion and home décor, so it’s not thousands of choices. Q: Look at the Japanese trade store, Rein Queen Rein King, which only sells best selling items from department stores.A: That’s perfect. This is a worldwide product for small businesses. Q: This is great, now small businesses can compete with Wallmart on pricing. A: We wanted to level the playing field. Q: Exactly like AdWords. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInQiuqiusou at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Google’s official Android Market is not available in China, leading to a plethora of independent markets – over 70 at last count. The system works – sort of – but users may find it annoying because you actually don’t know how to find the good stuff. China is still lacking any sort of innovative search mechanism to help people identify the apps they really need in daily life. Discovering the apps should not be boring, and the core value of Qiuqiu is to bring the pleasure of discovering apps during different activities. Qiuqiu’s app search engine is unique because it offers results based on your location, the time of day, and the things you like and do. Each scenario is expressed by a series of apps – education apps for the school day and travel apps for your vacation. It’s a compelling and interesting change from the traditional “editor’s choice” and selected apps lists found in many markets.  Qiuqiu, is the new app discovery engine developed by AppChina, one of the leading third party Android markets. The founders are a group of very experienced senior engineers and product managers from STC Bing search technology centre and graduates from Tsinghua, Beijing and Fudan Universities. Being successful in the Android market, as Luo Chuan, the co-founder of AppChina, formerly CEO of MySpace China, said, means suppling the right apps at the right time. AppChina is moving forward to the field of search engine and data mining and try to develop a new way of discovering Android apps most suitable for you. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInAlpha Outlook at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011Battlefield company AlphaOutlook has just launched their native social media monitoring service for the Chinese market. Founded by CEO Chad Pankewitz, the company currently has a major client, Burson-Marsteller in China. “China’s social media and Internet landscape has many unique characteristics that render the existing tools and platforms inoperable in China,” says Pankewitz. “There are 485 million people online and 900 million mobile users in China. We believe it is important to give businesses, inside and outside of China, the tools they need monitor, track, and gain meaningful insights into the millions of online conversations taking place in real-time. Understanding these conversations and social media trends is critical for making the right business decisions in China.” The tool allows for real-time social media tracking as well as improved control over reputation management and influencer monitoring.The software comes in two version – one for large agencies with Chinee clients. AlphaOutlook offers a white-label service so companies can offer the service as part of a service package. The second version is a subscription-based software as a service and allows customers to pay a monthly, quarterly, or yearly fee. You can sign up for a private beta here. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInRichi at TC Disrupt Beijing 2011“Why can’t credits be as convenient as credit cards?” This is the question with which TechCrunch Disrupt Beijing startup Richi opened their presentation, kicking off our first ever international Startup Battlefield. Why can my coffee shop points only buy me more coffee? If I don’t have enough loyalty points on one card to make a rewards purchase, why can’t I use some from another bank? The problem, they say, is a lack of openness — and that’s a problem they aim to solve.  Richi allows the consumer to merge credits from multiple programs (in the future, this will include systems like Facebook credits, airline miles, and credit card points) into one pool, opening up rewards purchases they may not otherwise be able to make. The user simply selects what they want, punches in the credentials for each system, and taps the “buy” button to wrap up the deal. Richi skims a fee (in the form of a few loyalty points, relative to each respective program) off the top of each purchase. Richi will begin their efforts with a handful of banks in their homeland of Taiwan, hopefully opening up over time first in Beijing and then onward to the rest of the world. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As proven by the massive success of the Angry Birds plush line, the world has a hungry for real-world Angry Birds wares. No where is that more apparent than Beijing, where the halls of countless toy shops and electronics stores are filled foot to ceiling with sundry Bird-themed goods, from sweatshirts and jeans to candy and balloons. The catch? Rovio didn’t authorize any of it. Where others may see a problem, Rovio Mobile’s Mighty Eagle (read: CMO) Peter Versterbacka sees opportunity. He roams these aforementioned shops in search of unauthorized goods — but not to complain or throw around legal orders. He’s there to find the best unofficial Angry Birds items… so he can copy them. Vesterbacka joined our own John Biggs on stage at Disrupt Beijing for a fireside chat, bringing a trio of Angry Birds balloons along. When questioned about the balloons, Peter responded: “I’m going to take these balloons back and tell our guys to make these.” This act of out pirating the pirates, it seems, is something of a habit for Peter. And why shouldn’t he do it? The intellectual property being utilized is, after all, his company’s. If someone’s looking to make a quick buck off of his team’s work and creativity, there’s really no reason the tables shouldn’t be turned. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Although most of the Hackathon Hackers escaped before we could interview them, we corralled two interesting groups backstage and asked them about their products and experience at TechCrunch Disrupt Beijing.  First we had Tianji Connect, an interface to the local LinkedIn clone that allows you to look up anyone on the Internet and see their experience and skills. Next, we talked to Shareware, a project that could potentially fixed TechCrunch in China. This projected replaces blocked social networks with their local equivalents, cutting out Twitter where Wiebo is only supported, for example. In all, these were some amazing projects and I’m glad the teams took the task seriously and the brought loads of skill and experience to the table. Impressive stuff. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDrew Houston on Being Open About a Startup IdeaIn episode II of Erick Schonfeld’s Founder Stories interview with Dropbox co-founder, Drew Houston, Houston describes how releasing a demo video to Hacker News during Dropbox’s early days catapulted his company into elite company. “I hoped that the response would be good so that Paul [Graham] and Y Combinator would see it.” The response was better than good. Houston says the video held the top spot at “Hacker News for a couple of days” and it turns out the right people were watching. One viewer was Arash Ferdowsi, who was so impressed that he paired up with Houston as a partner. Houston also credits the video with helping him receive almost immediate and valuable feedback. Asked if he was worried about copycats stealing the concept at the time – Houston responds, “It is easy for me to explain the idea, it is actually really hard to do it.” Below, Houston takes us inside Y Combinator and describes how Paul Graham weighed in with key advice while Houston was under the Y Combinator wing. “Our first sort of marketing attempt was like throwing spaghetti at a wall …we really struggled in terms of how to articulate this with investors because we had never really done that before, and Paul was really helpful to us in terms of distilling down the idea into a much shorter and sort of more compact presentation.” Advice in hand, the team went before a room full of investors at Demo Day, where you get “waived like a piece of steak” and hit it out of the park by walking them through an admittedly risky demo that could have wiped-out their entire PowerPoint presentation. Having survived the high-wire act, Houston says today, “Dropbox users save a billion files every three days.” Make sure to watch the entire video for additional insights and be sure to catch the first episode of Schonfeld’s interview with Houston here. Past episodes of Founder stories featuring Eric Ries, Fred Wilson and Dustin Moskovitz are here. Episode III of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDrew Houston on the Beginning of DropboxDropbox co-founder, Drew Houston recently sat down with TechCrunch Editor, Erick Schonfeld to discuss the origins of Dropbox – a service that allows users to upload and access their files from virtually any device, anywhere. With $250-million in funding and 45-million users, Dropbox is shaking up the world of digital storage. The roots of Dropbox were planted when Houston was a student at MIT. “You could sit down at any of tens-of-thousands of computers on campus and not only your files but your whole environment was just in front of you and kind of followed you around.” Then graduation hit and Houston says he was thrown “back to the stone age.” He had just launched a company but didn’t feel secure carrying it around in his jeans on a thumb drive. Solving his own issue, Houston created Dropbox and pitched it to Y Combinator with the premise that “Tom Cruise in Minority Report is not carrying around a thumb drive.” He was accepted. Below, Houston briefly describes how he tested Dropbox – without actually releasing Dropbox. It’s a strategy Eric Ries recently wrote about on TechCrunch.  Aware that releasing a flawed beta would result in customer backlash, Houston made and posted a video describing his software. “It turns out we got the same feedback from all of our prospective users that we would have gotten from putting code in their hands, except it was a ton less effort.” Speaking of feedback, when asked about the “file folder structure” of Dropbox, which was created before the iPad, Houston says Dropbox will apply a “post-PC non-file and folder centric approach to everything” it does. Make sure to check out the full video for additional insights. Past episodes of Founder Stories, featuring conversations with Eric Ries, Scott Heiferman, and Fred Wilson are here. Episode II of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily While everyone is making up their minds about whether Klout is an utterly meaningless service or the divine “standard for influence” the world has been clamoring for, I had an interesting chat with Klout co-founder and CEO Joe Fernandez the other day at the F.ounders conference in Dublin, Ireland. When I informed him that, if anything, I think that the name of the company was well chosen, he told me the story of how he obtained the domain name klout.com. Since I have a huge interest in that type of small behind-the-scenes story – and in domain names – I loved it and found it interesting enough to be worth sharing here. When the company started out a few years ago in New York City, Fernandez’ first and top choice for a name was Klout, so he registered klout.net and tried to get in touch with the owner of klout.com, who was based in San Francisco. Klout was still a long way of getting funded or making money, so Fernandez offered the owner $1,000 of his own money for the domain name. The owner responded by laughing at him, suggesting it was worth ‘high five figures’ and saying he had plans to build something for it. For the next year and a half, Fernandez harassed the owner every week to try and convince him to sell the domain name. Then, in August 2009, Fernandez decided to move the company from NYC to San Francisco. Around that time, Klout also raised its first round of seed funding: a check from angel investor Nova Spivack, which Fernandez cashed, keeping the cash in his apartment. Much to the dismay of his team and hosting company, he tells me. Next, Fernandez started following the owner of klout.com on Twitter, waiting for him to reveal his location. When the guy at one point tweeted that he was at a restaurant in San Francisco, Fernandez went there, threw an envelope with $5,000 in cash on the table and told him that he would stop bothering him if he finally agreed to sell the domain name in exchange for the money. The guy agreed, and Fernandez opened up his laptop and took care of the domain transfer right then and there, leaving the restaurant ten minutes later. He then tweeted this:  Admittedly, some will think this was slightly creepy and obnoxious behavior. I, on the other hand, think it’s awesome. Real entrepreneurs, after all, know how to hustle. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Reading, which began as a solitary activity, is increasingly becoming a social experience.  We share links constantly on Twitter and Facebook to the latest blog posts and articles we are reading, and electronic books such as Amazon’s Kindle allow you to share your highlights and notes with the world.  A few days ago, betaworks soft-launched a new product called Findings, which is aimed at sharing passages from digital books and the web. Findings is a pet project of Betaworks CEO John Borthwick and author Steven Johnson.  The service lets you share your highlights from Kindle books as well as articles on the web via a bookmarklet.  But it is not intended to be a web clipping service.  It is really more about reading in the digital age, sharing quotations from books and other writings that resonate with you and making them your own by collecting them into a feed.  In many ways it harkens back to an earlier form of reading hundreds of years ago when Englishmen would hand-assemble their own collections of quotations into a “commonplace book.”  The notions of reading and writing were intertwined, borrowing passages from others and making them your own was part of the process, as Robert Danton notes in The Case For Books: Unlike modern readers, who follow the flow of a narrative from beginning to end, early modern Englishmen read in fits and starts and jumped from book to book. They broke texts into fragments and assembled them into new patterns by transcribing them in different sections of their notebooks. Then they reread the copies and rearranged the patterns while adding more excerpts. Reading and writing were therefore inseparable activities. They belonged to a continuous effort to make sense of things, for the world was full of signs: you could read your way through it; and by keeping an account of your readings, you made a book of your own, one stamped with your personality. Findings allows you to share your readings and quotations in longer than 140 characters.  Each quotation links back to the book on Amazon (affiliate link!) or the original webpage.  You can discover what other people are reading by following them, and their highlights appear in your stream.  (You can follow Steven Johnson or John Borthwick or me).  And Findings shows you trending books and a public stream of the latest passages as well.  It’s social discovery for books.  And the search is excellent too.  Type in “startups” and you get clips from books about startups as well as passages which include that keyword.  For example, you might find all the collected quotes from The Lean Startup or from the Steve Jobs biography. These function as “best of” collections of quotes from the books, although the findings are listed chronologically.  The obvious next step is to let people vote up passages, or automatically rank them based on how many times they have been shared.  You can share other people’s passages or your own both in your own stream—kind of like reblogging— and on Twitter or Tumblr. Many of these features, of course, are built into the Kindle experience (sharing highlights and notes, following other readers, searching through highlights).  But it is an afterthought for Amazon.  Findings is a much cleaner experience.  The Kindle integration could be cleaner.  You have to periodically visit your Kindle highlights page and sync with Findings via the bookmarklet, but that is a limitation of the Kindle API.  And of course, Findings will include much more than just Kindle books.  Support for Instapper and other reading apps would broaden the appeal. Ultimately, though, this is betaworks, so you know it is all about the data.  Expect really interesting ways to search, sort, and recombine quotations in an endless loop of rewriting and rereading.  For Findings to succeed, it will have to bring the marginalia to the center of you reading experience.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Flash sales giant Gilt Groupe is acquiring the troubled daily deals startup BuyWithMe, which recently saw over half its staff laid off after the company failed to raise the funding it needed to survive. Beginning November 1st, BuyWithMe will officially become a part of Gilt, according to a report from BetaBeat, which has been covering the BuyWithMe saga for the past couple of weeks. The remaining sales staff left at the end of last week’s layoffs (staff who already took at 25% pay cut), will be let go, reports BetaBeat, which has been speaking with current and former BuyWithMe employees about the matter. Gilt will then gain BuyWithMe’s technology, customer email list, merchant partners and a few executives. Employees questions about unvested stock options were not answered on a company-wide conference last night, says the report. Gilt Groupe declined to comment on the matter. BuyWithMe laid off half its workforce last week, after having been unsuccessful in its attempts to buy its way to growth by acquiring other daily deals players. The company made its sixth acquisition in September, with its purchase of San Francisco-based TownHog . It previously acquired NYC’s Scoop St, Chicago deals site DealADayOnline, San Francisco deals site Swoop, loyalty company Edhance, and deals site LocalTwist. It raised $30 million from Bain Capital Ventures and Matrix Partners. Matrix Partners is also an investor in Gilt. Update: To be clear, this is not confirmed – so changing to “reportedly” buying in headline. We are hearing the same rumors, though. We’ve also confirmed that Gilt execs have been spotted in BuyWithMe’s New York office interviewing sales people. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This week, with support from the White House and the Obama administration, the Young Entrepreneur Council (YEC) announced the launch of a new startup accelerator and investment company, Gen Y Capital Partners. The new program will provide seed capital for tech-enabled startups created by Gen Y’ers (those under the age of 35). Like many accelerators, Gen Y Capital Partners (GYC) will provide mentoring, education, and assistance with living expenses. But the best part of the program? Getting in means getting rid of your federal student loan debt. According to the announcement, the program is the first to use the President’s Income-Based Repayment (IBR), which lowers the student loan repayment to 10% of the student’s discretionary income and adjusts the forgiveness timeline to 20 years. In addition, for those founders who apply to IBR, GYC will go a step further and pay down the student loan debt until it reaches zero (for up to three years), allowing them to exclusively concentrate on building their company. GYC will also offer founders the opportunity to live on college campuses for up to two years, with help from collegiate partners like Cogswell College, Georgetown and Princeton. Founders will be able to access GYC’s advisors plus hundreds of YEC members and mentors. And they will be allowed to join the invite-only YEC, an organization of young entrepreneurs founded by serial entrepreneur Scott Gerber, a syndicated columnist, TV host, angel investor and author of the book Never Get a “Real” Job.  Over the next 3 to 5 years, GYC will invest in as many as 100 startups, and over the next decade, several hundred more. The group plans to scale the fund over the next 24 months, the group says, and will begin to roll out more incubator programs on college campuses across the U.S. To be clear, there is no government money in the fund, only that from private investors. The debt repayment the program provides is in addition to the equity investment of $15,000 to $50,000 GYC makes in the startups it funds. Gen Y Capital Partners will begin reviewing applications on November 1st, and will announce the first class in early 2012. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKeen On with Brian Wong and Roger DickeyIn Silicon Valley, failure has been democratized. You don’t need a lot of money to fail. Nor do you need any previous experience. Take, for example, Brian Wong and Roger Dickey – two young Silicon Valley entrepreneurs who, in spite of their youth, are already steeped in failure. Wong, who was the youngest person ever to receive venture capital funding and is now the CEO of the mobile rewards network Kiip, once worked at Digg – the paragon of a failed Silicon Valley technology start-up. While Dickey managed to build 16 sixteen (yes, that’s SIXTEEN) failed Facebook apps before getting lucky with Mafia Wars. When I spoke to Wong and Dickey earlier this week at FailCon, they both embraced the idea of failure. It’s all about “mental resilience”, they told me. Every setback is a “learning opportunity”, they said, and they described failure as “the ultimate rebirth”. Great failures of the past include Thomas Edison and the Wright Brothers, they explained, while Groupon’s Andrew Mason and Zynga’s Mark Pincus are today’s heroic failures, guys who failed so fast and frequently that in the end that had to get something right. This is the fourth and final interview from the excellent FailCon event (many thanks to the BAMM.TV crew for filming the interviews).  Check out my previous conversations about failure with Vinod Khosla, MySpace co-founder Chris DeWolfe and Wavepoint Ventures GM Peter Gardner. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Enterprise relationship management startup Datahug has scored $1.5 million in a seed funding round led by Ireland-based Oyster Technology Investments, with Silicon Valley super angel investor Ron Conway chipping in. To learn more about its product, check out my earlier post: DataHug Aims To Map Digital Business Relationships.  The company last year won the Dublin Web Summit’s Spark of Genius startup competition – and a prize package worth €30,000 – so evidently Datahug decided that it will announce the seed capital round later today, at this year’s event. Datahug is basically a private search engine that allows you to discover if there are any coworkers or anyone else within your organization that can hook you up with a connection to that customer lead, potential partner or possible recruit you would like to have a conversation with. Says Datahug co-founder and CEO Connor Murphy: “With this funding, Datahug will keep pushing to unlock and organize the hidden network of contacts that exists within every organization.  We believe that using Datahug we can unlock 1,100 unique connections per employee. To date, we have unlocked over 4 million relationships, removing the need for cold calling.” The core strength of Datahug’s offering is that its on-demand service is automated, which basically means users don’t have to engage in data entry to “unlock relationships”. Datahug’s clients include companies in legal, insurance, banking, technology and investment spaces (which must be how they got in front of Ron Conway in the first place). You can check out available plans and pricing here; pricing starts at 5 euros per mailbox per month. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gild, a TechCrunch Disrupt startup and a game-ified jobs platform for developers, raised $2.4 million in seed funding from Globespan Partners back in August. Since launching at Disrupt a year ago, Gild has grown quickly, and today announced that it has attracted 500,000 members across 174 countries. Originally intended to be an all-encompassing career platform, Gild pivoted to concentrate on developers and engineers once they saw the high rate of early adoption among these two groups. While Gild lets developers submit resumes like any other job platform, it differentiates itself from the group by allowing companies posting their jobs to establish competitions or programming puzzles. Developers take these quizzes right on the site and are ranked according to their scores. And now, beyond building, sharing, and comparing their skills profiles, developers is officially introducing “Face-Offs”, which let developers go head-to-head to visually compare their skills and achievements. Much in the same way I might, say, compare two outstanding pitchers for my fantasy baseball team. According to Gild, since beta launching Face-Offs two months ago, more than 300,000 Face-Offs have been set up by developers on the site. And, big picture, since launching last September, Gild members have taken over 1 million tests on skills from C++ and Java through 30 other tech skills and languages. Each of these diverse activities, once completed, impacts a user’s skill ranking and determines who wins the dramatic face-off. So, choose wisely your opponents, grasshoppers, because the leaderboards don’t lie.  For more on Gild, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’m drinking a lot of coffee today because I was up well past my bedtime last night playing around with the test build of the newly launched ShoeBox iPhone application from 1000memories, now live in iTunes. This simple app provides a much-needed function: a way to scan old photographs using your smartphone and post them online. Oh, sure. I know you don’t necessarily need an app to scan a photo – you can just take a picture of the print and post it to Facebook. But the ShoeBox app provides a handy set of tools to complement and improve upon that process, including buttons to quickly crop, flatten and rotate photos, plus fields for filling in captions, dates and tags. With the improved camera quality of the iPhone 4S, now offering 8 megapixels and 2448×3264 resolution, a ShoeBox photo scan of a 4×6″ photo produces a DPI of 550, the company claims. The app works on older model iPhones, too, including the iPhone 4, 3GS and 3G and the iPad 2. Of course, photos taken on older iPhones won’t turn out as well. Having not “grown up” on Facebook myself  (I’m old), I’m clearly the target demographic for this application, as I, in fact, actually have 10 shoeboxes in my closet as well as 3 plastic bins, all filled with photos. In fact, I even have family photos going back to the 1880’s, thanks to the photo collection I inherited from my grandmother upon her passing. I’ve debated time and again about shipping off the collection to a service for digitization, but never quite got around to it. Now I can at least select a few of my favorites and quickly get them online. I do have a couple of beefs with the app, however. Although it says I can also post my photos to Twitter, after authenticating with Facebook, I couldn’t find the setting for this. As it turns out, it only appears after you’ve scanned and tweaked your photo – it’s not in the app’s default Settings screen. Also, the friend “tags” you fill in using the app don’t automatically translate to Facebook friend tags when the photo shows up on your profile. You still have to manually tag your Facebook friends in order to shame them via old photos. I imagine these are features that will be addressed via an update, though. So now that I have an app that allows me to post and share all those embarrassing high school, college and post-collegiate photos from my youth, what I’m discovering is that I have a lot of photos that shouldn’t be online. I don’t know how you kids do it, but for this Gen X’er, I guess I’ll just need to be careful with the cropping. In addition to the new iPhone app, 1000memories recently launched a service for digital memories and photos – a social network Jason dubbed a “Facebook for the Past.” More on that here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Topguest, the hot loyalty program which rewards users for engaging with brands on social networks, now has 5 million Facebook users in its database, the company has just revealed. These customers are collecting airline, hotel and other travel rewards points for their social networking activity, like Foursquare and Facebook check-ins, for example. Today, the company is announcing a new product that will make Topguest not just a social loyalty program, but a full-fledged social loyalty SaaS company. This fall it will debut a white-label service that will allow brands to customize their communication with each of their customers, based on their social networking activity. Topguest’s first partner with this effort will be Hilton HHonors. Hilton’s new social loyalty program, powered by Topguest, will be available at http://www.socialhhonors.com (site is not yet live). Members will receive 2,500 points simply for connecting their Facebook account, and will then have the opportunity to earn even more points for further engaging with the brand.  Here’s how the white-label service will work: Let’s say that you RSVP to a conference taking place in London on Facebook and are also a Hilton HHonors member who likes Doubletree hotels (a Hilton brand). Now Doubletree will be able to send you an offer for the specific dates you’re in London for a discount on your hotel stay. As a part of this effort, you will receive travel reward points for things such as “liking” a Topguest partner on Facebook, as noted above, and for sharing content related to that partner with your social networking friends, like tweets, Facebook posts, Foursquare check-ins and more. For the Topguest partner, the service lets them personalize and narrowly target their offers to each person individually, instead of blasting out millions of emails to all their members at once. Topguest says it will continue to reward its users for their social networking check-ins, as it did before, but these will now be weighted to reflect a given user’s influence. For example, those with more Foursquare friends may get more points. And those points may translate into a reward that gets you access to a last-minute table at the top restaurant in town, explains Topguest CEO Geoff Lewis. Through the white-label offering, Topguest will be able to provide a plethora of social data to its hotel and travel partners, including not just events and check-ins, but all your Facebook profile data, including your gender, birthday, email, hometown, time zone, work, website, friends, groups, likes and interests, and more. (See below image).  Initially, the program will rollout with Hilton HHonors, but the plan is to offer the white-label service to all Topguest partners in the months ahead. Today, those partners include Virgin America, Best Western, Wyndham, Choice, Caesars and more. Topguest was founded in mid-2010 and is backed by the Founders Fund and leading angel investors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily MoPub, the mobile advertising startup founded by former AdMob and Google employees, has been known as kind of a “Doubleclick for mobile” until now. Today, the company is expanding its offerings with the launch of the MoPub Marketplace, which will serve as a virtual trading floor for mobile ads, allowing app publishers to connect with ad buyers in real-time. The Marketplace will operate as a self-serve platform, allowing publishers to access new sources of revenue, while still remaining in control of their mobile ad inventory. Explains Co-founder and CEO Jim Payne, the new real-time marketplace can do what ad networks cannot, equating those to a sort of “black box” where publishers can’t control what they’re buying or target their ads with any real sophistication. To use the new service, iOS and Android developers can download the updated SDK, already in use by over 650 publishers on the MoPub platform. Once installed, publishers get detailed insights right down to which individual ad creatives are working and how well they’re working, for example. In the future, MoPub will begin offering even more fine-grained details, including hourly analysis of ad inventory. Publishers in the Marketplace can also choose to expose or hide their app’s name to bidders and can preemptively block ads from a particular advertiser or brand, like ads by a competitor. They can even block a specific ad itself. Although there are other real-time marketplaces out there – Nexage’s solution is fairly complete, says Payne – MoPub hopes to differentiate itself by becoming the one-stop shop for publishers. Its full lineup now includes direct-sold ads, cross-promotional campaigns, ad networks, and, thanks to the Marketplace launch, real-time bidding, all in one place. The pilot program for the Marketplace was previously in testing with around 10% of its user base (65 publishers) on an invite-only basis. Now, any interested publisher can sign up here for free. MoPub has raised over $6.5 million in venture capital from Accel Partners and Harrison Metal Capital. The funding was used towards the Marketplace development and to increase its staff, which is now 30 people, mostly engineers, in San Francisco and New York (and still growing).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social discovery service Banjo, which launched its cross-platform mobile application for iPhone and Android earlier this summer, has just introduced a new way to keep track of where your friends are and what they’re doing: automatic friend alerts. Unlike the alerts you see on Foursquare, which ping you every time a friend checks in somewhere, this friend alerting feature works across social networks. And more importantly, it only bothers you when your friends are actually nearby. You know what’s annoying? Foursquare telling me that my friend downtown just checked into Starbucks while I’m sitting here at my desk trying to get some work done. I just don’t care. But I do care to know where my friends are when I’m out and about, too. Maybe I’m the one checking into a Starbucks when my friend is doing a little back-to-school shopping just a few shops down. (OK, yes, I’m boring. Feel free to insert “bar,” “nightclub” or “restaurant” here if you have a more exciting life.) But how would I know that my friends are nearby? Until now, I probably wouldn’t have. Keeping track of your friends’ activity has typically been more of a manual effort – a somewhat stalker-like activity. You have to launch Google Latitude or Apple’s new “Find My Friends” app. You have to constantly keep an eye on your Facebook, Twitter and Foursquare streams for updates. What’s more useful is a service that simply tells you when your friend is just a block away (or 5 miles away – in Banjo, the choice is up to you). That’s what Banjo is doing now, and it’s awesome. The service, which connects to your Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare and Gowalla accounts, simply sends you a push notification (on either iOS and Android) when a friend is within the radius you specified. And when you don’t want to be bothered, you can turn off the alerts entirely or put them on pause with just a tap. You can even turn off alerts for individual friends. Simple, but incredibly useful. (Note that the ability to specify the radius for alerts is rolling out in a few days. The friend alerts themselves are live now, however).  Banjo, which just announced it has now reached 300,000 users, also finds nearby people through geo-tagged updates posted to TwitPic and Instagram. As of yet, those networks are only used for discovery purposes, not to provide alerts. The app is available for download here on iTunes or here on the Android Market.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKeen On with Peter GardnerFew people know failure better than venture capitalists. Even the most successful fail much more than they succeed and the best are those, like Vinod Khosla, who acknowledge that their successes are much rarer than their failures. Another venture capitalist well acquainted with failure is Peter Gardner, Managing Director of Wavepoint Ventures, a Menlo Park shop that primarily invests in software, medical technology and clean tech start-ups. I caught up with Peter earlier this week at the engaging FailCon conference where he spoke on the Failure of Business Models panel. “We’ve had our fair share of failures,” Gardner confessed to me, stressing that one of the greatest assets of Silicon Valley was its tolerance of failure. Sharing Ron Conway’s view on failure, Gardner explained that rather than being born to succeed, great entrepreneurs are born to be able to deal with failure. This interview is the third in a weeklong series from FailCon about failure. Yesterday, Chris DeWolfe talked about MySpace – one the most spectacular failures of the entire Internet age. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Y Combinator alum ReadyForZero is rolling out an upgrade to its debt management service today, with new features that will now allow its users to centralize and manage more of their debt using its online application. Previously, the company was focused only on reducing consumers’ credit card debt. Now it’s adding support for mortgages, auto loans and student loans, too. At first glance, ReadyForZero may be mistaken for a competitor to the online money management service Mint. But where Mint helps you gain insight into your spending behaviors, ReadyForZero is more narrowly focused on helping your actively pay down your debt. Like Mint, it automatically imports data from your bank accounts, credit card accounts and now loans, but it uses this information to actively make recommendations as to when you’re able to make extra payments in order to save on interest. It can also alert you to the repercussions that recent big-ticket purchases will have on your plans to pay down your debt within a given timeframe, and can suggest ways you can get back on track. More importantly, however, is that the system works. As MG reported this summer, regular users of ReadyForZero’s service are getting out of debt twice as fast as irregular users. In addition to the added support for loan management noted above, the ReadyForZero user interface has been tweaked to include some new features, like a “speed” gadget that shows you how much faster you’re paying off debt by making extra payments. The tool aims to help you better visualize the adjustments you’re making to your payment plans.  The site also now includes new suggested actions that give you tasks to complete, like setting up payment reminders to sync with your calendar or linking your accounts, among other things.  The “share your progress” feature has been expanded, too, so you can provide an anonymized URL that provides a snapshot of your progress on debt reduction to lenders and banks in need of proof of your efforts. According to Co-founder Rod Ebrahimi, the startup is already fielding inquires from two of the top five banks for consumer debt. The banks want to know how they can take advantage of the service’s offerings to help their customers restructure their debt so as to reduce the banks’ risk. At any given time, Ebrahimi explains, 10% of of these banks’ debt is at risk. Or, in other words, tens of billions of dollars. ReadyForZero is now working with some of these banking institutions now to test how the service can provide its users with access to banks’ own products and programs that could help them further reduce their debt. Also on the roadmap are plans for automating payments and a set of mobile applications. In June, ReadyForZero raised $4.5 million in Series A funding led by Polaris Venture Partners with participation from Citi Ventures. This followed an earlier $260,000 seed round featuring prominent angels like Steve Chen, Dave McClure, Benjamin Ling, Nils Johnson, and Maneesh Arora. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Livestream is unveiling a major upgrade to its live video service today.  It won’t be fully rolled out until December, but you can see a preview of it here or watch the video below.  The new player brings a few firsts to live video: an adaptive bitrate which can adjust dynamically based on the viewers bandwidth up to HD quality (720p); an instant playback DVR feature; a live blogging platform to add text, photos, and video clips underneath the main video; and social networking features.   One of the most noticeable changes is the DVR functionality.  “Viewers can rewind while it is live,” says CEO Max Haot.  One of the big issues with live video online is that it takes a while for an archive to be viewable.  At the very least, you have to wait for the live event to be finished before an archive can be produced.  But Livestream’s new platform allows for viewers to jump back to earlier parts of the live video while it is still being streamed.  This feature will also allow producers to cut clips and embed them in the feed below the video stream.  “We are redefining a livestream,” says Haot.  “It is not just video.  It could be a photo, video clips, text.”  The feed below the video can be filled with all of those things, and can even serve as a liveblog of the event being streamed live.  In this sense, Livestream is entering a new market with its liveblogging capability currently occupied by startups such as ScribbleLive and Coveritlive (but they don’t offer the live video capability). Finally, Livestream is adding social features to increase engagement such as profile pages, the ability to follow other members, and see what they are publishing on your personal dashboard.  Eventually, Haot plans to introduce a reposting feature much like Tumblr’s reblogging button.  Another feature on the roadmap will be the ability to share links to specific moments in a video.  Livestream is already big on Facebook, but these features are designed to make its own site more social.   Haot also shared some stats with me.  Livestream reaches 35 million people a month who collectively watch 1.5 billion minutes of video,  The New York City company employs 120 people and is on track to do $12.5 million in revenues this year, up from about $5 million in 2010.  He hopes to get to “nearly break even” this year, and believes the new platform will help him grow even faster next year.   The video below offers a quick preview of the new player, which will be tested with while livestreaming the Volvo Ocean Race sailing event.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Discovr, the awesome tool that allows users to discover new apps for iOS (by way of interactive graphs) is announcing that it has passed the one million downloads milestone and has closed a $1.1M seed round led by Australia’s leading VC firm Yuuwa Capital. Of course, there’s no better way to celebrate these achievements than launch a new version of your app for Apple desktops, right? Today, the startup is also announcing the release of its Discovr Music app, which is available for $5 now on those Mac App Stores near you. Discovr Music, put simply, makes it easy to discover new music from the comfort of your laptops and desktops. To give a sense of context, in January of this year, Discovr launched a nifty iPad app that essentially provided users with an interactive map of the music world, displaying (among other things) connections between bands and artists in a graphical web. With a few quick taps, users could see musicians’ videos on YouTube, band info and other extras, all while experiencing a fairly unique visual interface that provides an easy way to weave through connections between bands to discover new music and cool apps. The app attracted 150K downloads in three days, and by June, Discovr had taken its music discovery and visualization model for iOS to the apps world at large. Discovr Apps enabled users to search for their favorite apps, choose from Discovr’s curated, featured apps, at which point the tool will show your choice in an interconnected network of related apps that are linked together based on their similarities. How does Discovr determine these similarities? Thank you for asking. Like many other recommendation services, Discovr serves the user with its web of similarities based on a synthesis of machine algorithms and human curation. Those networks of similar apps can be expanded as the user surfs, and ostensibly, if the page were large enough, as I wrote in June, one could probably “create a massive, mind-melting map of all the apps on the App Store”.  Not that you will, but you could, were you so inclined.  And speaking of larger screens, as mentioned above, Discovr is now back into the music game with its new launch of Discovr Music for the Mac App Store. While Discovr’s iPad functionality is terrific, the visual layout is almost better suited to the larger screens of your desktop and laptops. The user experience is the same as Discovr’s first app, in that it uses data visualization and music recommendations to provide a visual map of the world of music. Users can navigate through the musical ecosystem and discover new music based on what their individual tastes.   What’s more, the app is built from the ground up to make the most of OSX Lion, but also supports backwards compatibility to Snow Leopard. It’s dual-cat compatible. To accompany the release of Discovr Music on the Mac App Store, Filter Squad (the company behind the Discovr apps) is announcing that it has raised $1.1 million in seed funding, led by Australian VC firm Yuuwa Capital. The raise follows Filter Squad’s recent victory at the Australian startup competition “Tech23”, where it was awarded $25,000 as the Aussie startup with “the most potential”.  I suppose it’s easy to say that Filter Squad has potential when, in just 9 months, it has attracted over 1 million downloads across iOS devices. And now we’ll see what kind of adoption Discovr is able to find on Apple desktops.  One more thing: Android fans, never fear, Filter Squad is currently building Android versions of its Discovr apps, which are on the way and will hopefully arrive by the end of the year. For more on Discovr Music for the Mac, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In November of last year, i/o Ventures-backed Skyara launched a platform that was essentially the Airbnb for experiences, as it allowed those who are in the position to offer cool experiences like a culinary tour, beer tasting, or personalized yoga to hook up with those who want to try them. Skyara was the platform that would connect the providers with the fun-seekers. Since then, founders Jonathan Wu, Dennis Liu and Steven Ou have been working quietly on the platform, adding, iterating, and tweaking. As is often the case, the development process led to an early pivot, and the team is officially transitioning Skyara into a new product, called RAVN — which launches in private beta today. (Invites below.) Unfortunately for early Skyara users, the team will be either shutting down or redirecting Skyara in the near future.  But this transition has not come without the help of outside investment. The team behind RAVN raised a round of seed funding, led by HillsVen Capital, allowing it to work on its new product in stealth mode over the last few months. Besides being “so raven” (sorry, I had to), what is it that RAVN brings to the table? Put simply, RAVN is a search and booking engine for things to do. In other words, if you’re interested in activities, tours, events, classes, or leisure services, RAVN aims to make it easy to find those experiences and book them online.  RAVN currently has a marketplace of over 13,000 activities, with a presence in the Bay Area, New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago, and the team is in the process of expanding to Hawaii, Washington DC, and Las Vegas in the next few months.  If, for example, you’re interested in planning a wine tour in Napa, users can compare prices for different wine tastings, or plan a trip to one of Napa’s 22 free vineyards. Or, maybe you’re looking for a yoga class on a Thursday evening, so users can navigate over to RAVN to discover the top rated and most conveniently located studio based on your ability. Users can then book them in advance to save a spot in the class. As those savvy readers may be gathering, RAVN is the natural evolution of the process that began with Skyara: The founders want to create a new experience market similar to what Etsy did for craft fans. The intended audience is anyone who wants an answer to “What is there to do this weekend?” For those looking for a creative idea for a date, and want to quickly browse for ideas and get the ball rolling without having to pick up the phone, RAVN will be a valuable destination.  Of course, RAVN will be (in some cases loosely) competing with other local discovery websites like Loku, Sosh, Gogobot, et al, but RAVN is hoping to build a platform that enables the closing of the loop for all local activities. Said another way: RAVN will allow users to discover activities, plan, connect, and schedule with friends, book direct — all in an effort to step away from the location-based daily deal vertical.  To this end, RAVN will allow local businesses to create a business page on its platform to accept online bookings without any prior programming knowledge. RAVN pages are free to sign up and test, and once a customer books an activity through a business’ page, the startup will forward the customer’s information so that all businesses need to do is complete the service when the customer arrives at the scheduled time. That’s it. The startup is also distributing 200 beta invites to TechCrunch readers. To start testing out the platform, simply find your way over to RAVN and enter the code “TECHCRUNCH”.   Then come on back and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been a rough year for Mahalo. The startup, which was founded by Jason Calacanis in 2007, began its life as a human powered search engine that offered curated links in what was intended to be a mix between the traditional search layout and Wikipedia. Over time, Mahalo became a knowledge directory, launched a Q&A service a la Yahoo! Answers, and began producing educational and games-related video content.  However, in late February, Google made a change to how it determines rankings for the websites it aggregates and serves in search results as part of an effort to lower the rank of content farms and reward sites producing higher quality content. Though Mahalo had spent millions producing expert-driven video content as well as accompanying articles, Calacanis wrote to employees in March that Google’s revisions had led to a “significant dip” in their “traffic and revenue”.  In the same email, the CEO shared the news that the startup had cut 10 percent of its staff, reduced non-essential services, and touched on the long-term goal of Mahalo, which is to become a resource for high-quality educational video and written content.  Earlier this month, Mahalo initiated another round of layoffs, reducing its team of 67 to 49, approximately 27 percent of its staff. (It had a staff of more than 100 employees as recently as February.) Mahalo President Jason Rapp tells me that most of these layoffs were part of the platform’s video game team. The site’s gamers had been producing walk-throughs and reviews of video games, which had built some good traffic (about 15+ million views per month, he said), but the content is not easily convertible into apps.  And this is where Mahalo sees its future. While the startup will continue with its educational video production, Rapp said that they will dial back the volume of video content as it shifts more energy to focus on developing educational apps. Part of the reason for this is, again, while Mahalo’s educational and gaming video content was seeing a collective 30 million views per month, many of those views were occurring on YouTube and not Mahalo itself. Revenue from video advertising both on its site and on YouTube have not been significant enough to warrant the dedication of further resources toward those verticals. Instead, Mahalo believes that there’s money to be had in educational apps, specifically for the iPad. Over the last two months, the startup has released four apps, three of which are paid apps: Learn guitar at $4.99, Learn Pilates at $9.99, and How to Draw at $9.99. Thus far, the company has seen 65,000 installs across its iPad apps, which may well be early confirmation that paid iPad apps will be a more valuable source of revenue that video advertising. Rapp also said that the team plans to release a free gaming walkthrough app very soon, which will monetize through in-app purchases. This is evidence of what’s to come, as Mahalo will ramp up app development, with Rapp saying that the company is targeting a release cycle of one app per week through the remainder of 2011. While Mahalo has downsized by more than 50 percent since February, it’s a well-funded operation, having raised over $21 million in outside investment from some big names that include Sequoia Capital,  Mark Cuban, CBS, News Corp., and Elon Musk. The startup also counts Roelof Botha and Matt Coffin as board members. Certainly, Mahalo has seen better times, and it’s become clear that the team was over-producing for the video game market. The reduction in staff does seem to reveal that Mahalo may have spread itself too thin and was trying to do too much — or at the very least had dedicated too many resources to a less value vertical. But, startups often don’t find the best direction without making a few mistakes, and pivots are often a must. It’s just a matter of making them before financing and investor faith dries up. For Mahalo, Rapp said that he thinks the company will be able to better serve its audience and focus on its new app-centric direction with a smaller staff. Of course, that doesn’t make it any easier to be one of the now unemployed (and former) staffers at Mahalo. Perhaps getting back to the lean startup mentality will help steer the company in a more profitable direction. We’ll see. For more on Mahalo, check ’em out at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInSteve Anderson on Signaling RiskWhen startups are choosing investors for their seed round, it is important to pick ones who will stick around for the long run. Otherwise, they may run into what Founder Collective co-founder Chris Dixon calls “signaling risk.”  The risk of getting a high-profile investor in your seed round is that they might not follow on in later rounds, and that sends a signal to other investors that there might be something wrong with the company. Dixon discusses signaling risk in this episode of Founder Stories with Steve Anderson of Baseline Ventures. In recent years, there’s been an uptick in seed stage investing to the point where “large VC’s [are] investing in seed companies,” notes Dixon.  He is of the opinion that it’s risky for founders to take their cash because “if the big VC doesn’t follow on it makes it harder for the entrepreneur to raise the next round.” Anderson agrees that picking the correct investment partner is paramount and referring directly to high-end VCs pouring into seed funding, he says it is basically illogical to think a fund managing hundreds of millions will give the same attention to small investments as large investments. This becomes an issue when “you have entrepreneurs who are looking for help … and then they didn’t get any.” This is their opinion as seed stage investors – however the best VC’s would likely tell you: they like to invest early and stick with their companies all the way through. Nevertheless, “the signaling issue is real” says Anderson, “my advice always is think about the motivations of the people that are coming in, how helpful will they be, how much help do you want, what are you looking for and then size your investment from them appropriately.” The conversation continues in the video below and the two use a Wall Street Journal article titled Web Start-ups Hit A Cash Crunch, to discuss if the start-up sector is suffering a downturn. Dixon doesn’t agree that it is, saying “the market has been very, very strong for quality companies.” Anderson agrees with Dixon and says, “I think that article was really more of a forecast of a possible outcome in the future … but not a reality today.” Anderson then adds “seed rounds are about product market fit and establishing something of value and in my opinion those will always get funding as long as you are doing those core things, if your thesis was wrong and you tried and it didn’t work out, well of course you are not going to get funding.” The two end with Anderson offering what he considers to be a strong start-up bets in the future. He says, “the ecosystem that is evolving around Facebook is undeniably going to be one of the most powerful ecosystems going foward.” Make sure to watch both videos for additional insights and check out episodes I and II to hear the entire conversation. Past episodes of Founder stories featuring Instagram, BirchBox and Eventbrite are here. (Disclosure, Dixon is an investor in Baseline funds) Latest headlines delivered to you daily The popular social gaming network for Android, PapayaMobile, is announcing today that it’s now expanding its gaming platform to iOS. The company is making its social development toolkits available to iOS developers as a beta release, allowing them to connect users on both platforms (iOS and Android) for in-game features including challenges, game invites, leaderboards and more. In addition, developers who have built their social games using Papaya’s Social Game Engine can now export both iOS and Android versions of their game from a single code base, the company says. To kick off the iOS support, several third-party game developers will bring their new games to the Papaya network in the coming weeks as iOS releases. The current list of expected games includes X-City by Aidi Game, Contagion by 2Clams and Burger Joint by Arctic Empire. All developers will also have access to PapayaMobile’s recently launched Gateway to China program, which localizes, distributes and promotes Western games in the Chinese market. Earlier this summer, Papaya announced it had reached 25 million users – 940% growth since the beginning of last year. The growth was attributed to the ever-increasing size of the Android market. Now, the company says it has over 30 million users. And all this before it hits the iPhone. PapayaMobile raised $18 million in a Series B round led by Chinese venture firm Keytone Ventures and DCM this April, bringing Papaya’s total funding to $22 million. Last week, the company announced, too, that it will be one of the first startups to receive an investment from DCM’s A-Fund. The $100 million A-Fund is intended to support early-stage startups focused on Android. DCM partnered with gaming giant Tencent, Japan’s largest mobile gaming social network GREE and Japan’s second largest mobile operator KDDI, to fund the startups, each which will receive anywhere from $250,000 to $5 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online store and backup service provider Backblaze this morning released version 2.0 of its flagship product, bumping up the allowed file size for storage and backups up to ‘unlimited’ and bringing other enhancements to the table. The company has actually always provided unlimited storage – and “unthrottled bandwidth” – for five bucks a month, but now vows to make its unlimited offering even more unlimited. That’s right, boys and girls, infinite is the new unlimited. Here’s a list of the main new features and improvements in Backblaze 2.0: There are other enhancements, mainly in terms of speed and performance, but maybe you should just give it a whirl. New customers, trials, and new installs by existing customers will automatically get Backblaze 2.0. Current customers and free trials will be automatically upgraded over the next few weeks (although users can ‘check for updates’ right now).  Backblaze customers that update from an existing version will keep the settings they have on their current installation. If you want to learn more about who and how Backblaze can offer this at a relatively low price (if you pay for 1 year, it’s actually only about $4 per month), you should read Devin’s earlier story. On a sidenote: I enjoyed re-reading an article about Backblaze I wrote a while ago: Online Backup Startup Backblaze Was Almost Bought. Twice. What Went Wrong? Latest headlines delivered to you daily CrowdOptic, a maker of an augmented reality app and mobile analytics solutions for the enterprise, has raised $500,000 in new funding today in a round led by Bowman Capital. According to CEO Jon Fisher, CrowdOptic will use the new capital to accelerate development of products in the area of mobile-powered technology for live events as well as expand the security features of its platform. For those unfamiliar with CrowdOptic, the company makes a platform that can detect where crowds are focused in real-time by triangulating their angle and bearing via the GPS and compass on users’ smartphones. It then applies algorithms to detect shifts or anomalies in the crowd’s attention patterns. A dashboard and alerts system can communicate with onsite security personnel when a possible threat is detected. The platform also supports real-time advertising, broadcasting and communication during live events, including augmented reality displays. This is how CrowdOptic gets the crowd to use their smartphones in the first place – a cool augmented reality app. At a sporting event, for example, a fan might be able to point their phone at one of the players in order to get more info about them, like their stats, or they could receive messages sent out from the team to its fanbase. Recently, CrowdOptic signed security services firm Andrews International onto its platform, and will now provide its technology to its 15,000 security personnel for use at the events it oversees. “WithCrowdOptic, we will be able to surveil the crowd and support our personnel with a stronger arsenal than onsite security cameras,” Randy Andrews, CEO of Andrews International, said in a statement. CrowdOptic is a privately held, venture-backed company based in San Francisco.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch readers may remember Brammo as the Oregon-based designer and manufacturer of all-electric motorcycles (and the battery technology and software that powers them), or as the makers of the bike one Mike Arrington was driving around the conference center at Disrupt NYC this year, whereupon he was almost removed from Disrupt by security. Later, in conjunction with Brammo CEO (And Disrupt Speaker) Craig Bramscher, Arrington gave the motorcycle away to one lucky mother of a marine. Back in 2008, Brammo raised its first chunk of outside investment, an $11 million round led by Chrysalix Energy Venture Capital and Best Buy Venture Capital. Today, the electric vehicle technology company has added another significant piece of change to its vault, announcing the close of the final tranche of a $28 million series B round of financing.  Gigaom first reported the company’s close of the initial $12.5 million portion of its series B back in September 2010. Today marks the official close. For those still confused, Brammo has raised just under $40 million to date. The final tranche of Brammo’s second round of investment was led by Polaris Industries and included contributions from existing investor, Alpine Energy, as well as first-time investor NorthPort Investments. Polaris, the manufacturer of snowmobiles, ATVs, and neighborhood electric vehicles, joins the Brammo team as a key strategic partner, providing the electric motorcycle maker with an opportunity to bring its drivetrain technology to new markets. Bramscher told TechCrunch that he hopes Polaris can be to Brammo what Toyota has been for Tesla. For those unfamiliar, the CEO was referring to Tesla’s strategic partnership with Toyota (forged prior to Tesla’s IPO in May 2010) in which Toyota agreed to purchase $50 million in Tesla common stock, followed by an announcement that the two companies would collaborate to build an electric version of Toyota’s popular RAV4. Through its new partnerships with the powersports leader as well as its manufacturing partner, Flextronics, Brammo is looking to synthesize powersports and innovative electronics to realize scale and kick its product development plans into fifth gear. As to these powersport product development plans, Brammo has two super moto and off-road motorcycles (Engage and Encite) coming down the pipeline as well as a sport motorcycle called Empulse, which will add to its existing flagship product, the 2010 Electric Motorcycle of the Year, Enertia — an “urban commuter” motorcycle that runs about $8K per bike. Furthermore, Bramscher said that its partnership with Polaris will enable the company to broaden its reach in product development, geographic scale, while Flextronics gives Brammo the ability to scale through supply chain optimization and high quality assembly (the company will soon begin producing Brammo Power battery packs), as well as access to design for manufacturing services.  The new round of funding marks a big win for the up-and-coming EV maker, and we’ll be looking forward to the release of these cool new green bikes soon, especially as Brammo looks to nose out fellow American competitors and all-EV makers, Zero Motorcycles and Mission Motors. For more on Brammo, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Casual games publisher King.com is today announcing it has passed one billion gameplays per month and is now one of the top 10 largest developers on Facebook’s social network. The company, which offers nearly 200 multi-platform games in 14 languages, is also expanding its reach in North America with the opening of new offices in San Francisco. The San Francisco office will be located downtown and will serve as the operations center for all North American business development initiatives for the company. Jong Woo is joining the U.S. office as senior business development director for the U.S. from his previous position as senior business development executive at Blockdot, an interactive agency specializing in branded entertainment and “advergaming.” Prior to Blockdot, Woo served as President of casual game publisher Gamelab, makers of “Diner Dash” and “Jojo’s Fashion Show.” Over the past month, King.com’s “Saga” games (Bubble Saga and Bubble Witch Saga) have generated over 600 million gameplays on Facebook alone. In total, the company is now seeing 17.6 million monthly active users on Facebook, it says. (Source: AppData, Oct. 25th).  Going forward, King.com’s week-old Romanian office will be the center of its mobile game development operations. Here, the focus will be on porting its most popular games to iPhone and Android. CEO Riccardo Zacconi tells me that there are already two games in the development pipeline which will launch on mobile by year-end. The company also has offices in London, Hamburg, Stockholm and Milan. King.com was founded in 2003 with a focus on casual gaming in Europe and the U.S. In April, it launched a platform for porting its games to Facebook. There are currently three King.com games on Facebook, and more will be on the way soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Clever Sense’s local recommendations app Alfred was already doing a great job suggesting restaurants, coffee shops, bars and nightclubs using its artificial intelligence-based system. But today, it’s going to do something even more extraordinary – it will make suggestions based on who you’re with. This new feature, rolling out today through an app update in iTunes, will combine your personal likes and interests with those of your friends in order to suggest places you will all agree on. In case you’re not familiar with what Alfred does, check out Jason’s earlier review here and his deep dive into its tech here. Simply put, Alfred is a smart, algorithmically-based recommendations system that understands what you like using something called model-based learning. This system lets Alfred build sophisticated, but highly personalized, recommendations. To generate its suggestions, Alfred sorts through hundreds of attributes associated with a given user. According to CEO Babak Pahlavan, each user has, on average, 200 of these “tags” that help Alfred understand a person’s individual interests. And this is in addition to an average of 24 explicit “likes” on Alfred itself. When combining and comparing these tags from one user with another, you’re now talking about thousands of data points Alfred has to consider. The breakthrough here is that Alfred can do exactly this, even for groups larger than two, with minimal impact to the performance of its recommendations engine. In other words, Alfred just got a lot smarter but it didn’t slow down in doing so. The group recommendations feature, however, only works if your friends are also Alfred users. To encourage your friends to try the app, so you both can use the new feature, the app now suggests you send them a text or email invite. In the future, Alfred will begin to surface recommendations for other categories of businesses, but in the near-term, it’s working towards using its technology for deal recommendations. Instead of us being spammed with emails from daily deal providers like Groupon and LivingSocial, Alfred will use its knowledge of your personal interests to recommend which deals it knows you’ll like. Pahlavan says this deal curation feature is on track to arrive by year-end. The company is also working on a Web-based and Android version of its system. The updated app will roll out to iTunes users sometime today.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re not familiar with Yodlee, they’re the financial services company that developed technology to make back-end aggregation of bank data secure and speedy so that services like Mint.com could be born and go on to be swallowed up by Intuit for boatloads of cash. Founded in 1999, Yodlee now boasts over 30 million users and has raised over $100 million in funding to date. It’s quietly become a provider of financial applications and management solutions that let users collect all their account information in one, centralized place to let them easily manage all their pesky financial tasks.  This is really the big value proposition for Yodlee. Online banking is really no longer just online banking, it’s now personal financial management. They may sound the same, but to the customer, the latter gives the impression that they’ll be able to manage their finances all in one place and that the management experience won’t suck, it will be personalized, and offer the benefits of modern technology — like, for example, mobile functionality.  Yodlee’s FinApp Store was created with this exact purpose in mind, as it allows banks to take advantage of a technology platform and apps ecosystem that allows them to rapidly build and deliver personalized financial services. More than 250 developers have registered to the Yodlee FinApp ecosystem already to help banks create revenue-generating apps like, for example, merchant-funded rewards, automated tax preparation, identity protection, etc. The apps are then delivered by Yodlee alongside its personal finance solutions to enable banks (and their chosen partners) to access a single, secure delivery mechanism for these complementary app-based financial services. Of course, Yodlee succeeds based on the partnerships it forges with financial institutions and banks, and today the company is adding a big-name partner to its bullpen, announcing that Bank of America will be implementing Yodlee’s FinApp platform into its online banking operations very soon.  As FinApps turn your online banking experience into something that’s more representative of a modern smartphone homescreen than a bleak, dreary accountant’s office, BoA is hoping to give its customers enhanced web banking UX through a variety of financial apps that will let them turn their BoA online account into a full-service banking depot. Because, let’s be honest, Bank of America’s online banking experience could use a shot in the arm. FinApps tap into users’ financial data (securely, mind you) to deliver coupons based on their transactions, tax prep from H&R Block, custom savings plans, credit-score improvement, and (the biggest attraction) p2p money transfers. Bank of America badly needs to infuse new life into its personal online banking experience, and Yodlee’s tech (which, by the way, includes an API to let developers build cool apps for Yodlee’s products) bring a mix of trusted financial management services along with third-party development that may just make BoA’s online banking experience more bearable. Stay tuned for more. More on Yodlee here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There have been a number of startups that have tried to create a social network for neighborhoods and communities, including OhSoWe and DeHood. But there isn’t one platform that has been able to be the go-to social platform for local neighborhoods groups. Enter Benchmark-backed Nextdoor, the next startup to throw its hat in the social network for neighborhoods ring. Nextdoor, which is a private social network for neighborhoods, was co-founded by Nirav Tolia, of Epinions fame. After Epinions (which became Shopping.com), Tolia spend time as an EIR at Benchmark, and then co-founded FanBase, a directory of all things sports. Now Tolia is on to his next project, Nextdoor, which is launching to the public today, after being in private beta for the past year. On Nextdoor, neighbors create private, Facebook-like websites for their neighborhoods where they can ask questions, get to know one another and exchange local advice and recommendations. Topics of discussion are as varied as local events, school fundraisers, plumber and babysitter recommendations, recent crime activity, upcoming garage sales or even lost pets. Unlike an email listserv or other online group, neighbor posts are organized and archived for future reference. All neighborhoods are private and you have verify whether you live in a particular neighborhood by entering your address. In fact, the network has a rigorous process in which people can join. Nextdoor uses four methods to verify member addresses. Nextdoor can send a postcard to a new member’s address with a unique code printed on it. The code will allow them to log in and verify their account. You can bypass this if you have a listed phone number registered to your home address, and you can request a free phone call to verify your home address. Nextdoor can also instantly verify a new member’s home addressthrough a credit card billing address. Or someone who is already a verified member of the website canvouch for a neighbor by inviting them to their website with an email, flyer or postcard invitation. Information shared on Nextdoor is password-protected and cannot be accessed by those outside the neighborhood or found on Google and other search engines. Via a map for each community, you can see which of your neighbors have joined and who has yet to join. Users can find other neighbors in the resident directory, view a neighborhood map, ask for advice, exchange local recommendations, and share neighborhood information with each other. Neighbors can choose to see and respond to updates via email, or only on the website. Tolia believes there is a huge opportunity in trying to solve the problem of connecting neighborhoods and communities for the greater good. He explains that most communication is done via email or phone, and there is a need for a private, communications platform for each local neighborhood. Benchmark partner Bill Gurley agrees. “Nextdoor is different from other social networking sites because it was built from the ground up to help neighbors come together in a trusted environment…We have been blown away by the positive response to Nextdoor and believe it is a natural evolution of social networking that will demonstrate the value of building community to neighborhoods everywhere.” Nextdoor raised an undisclosed amount of funding from Benchmark Capital and Shasta Ventures. Gurley and Shasta Venture’s Jason Pressman serve on the board of directors, along with outside board member Rich Barton, Chairman and Co-Founder of Zillow. Ed Everett, Nextdoor’s senior city strategist and the former City Manager of Redwood City, has been working in city administration for a number of years. He says that at the neighborhood level, there was no appealing offering to create an online community for neighborhoods. He believes that because of Nextdoor’s private, geographic-focused nature, the network is the ideal platform for communities. Over the past year, neighbors in over 175 neighborhoods across 26 states established Nextdoor websites with the goal of creating more connected and safer places to call home. Tolia says engagement was high among users and the platform received positive responses from members. Check out our video with Tolia below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in February, digital gifting platform CashStar raised $5 million in series B funding from Allen and Company and Passport Capital. Today, the startup is announcing that it has cashed in on yet another round of outside funding, with $12 million in new series C financing led by FTV Capital. The round also included participation from existing investors like Coupons.com President & CEO Steven Boal and Passport Capital. The series C financing brings the startup’s total investment to north of $21 million. Operating among similar names like BlackHawk, First Data, Gift Tango, and Swag, CashStar’s value proposition is that gives big brands and retailers a SaaS, white-label solution to enable the easy implementation of digital gifting systems. CashStar’s value is also drawn from its network of more than 200 well-known brands, like Starbucks, Gap, Best Buy, Williams-Sonoma, Home Depot, etc., all of which are using the startup’s platform to drive sales through on-demand digital gifting and multichannel marketing and loyalty strategies.  CashStar also allows these retailers to choose from a variety of gift card deployment options, via eGift cards, Facebook, or mobile phones, to give their customers personalized and convenient ways to share their gifts, tools that have enabled CashStar’s partners to sell tens of millions of gift cards each year.  Consumers and businesses are always looking for more personal and less obnoxious ways to send digital gifts, and CashStar’s mobile and social gifting and incentives make it easy for companies to make personalized, location-based gift options available to their customers.  As such, CashStar plans to use its newest round of funding to strengthen its brand network and continue to educate retailers and brands on the possibilities inherent to digital gifting — a rapidly growing segment of the $90 billion plus gift card market.  As the company pursues its plans to build the market from plastic to digital, it is also looking for new ways to allow businesses to turn loyalty points and rewards into gift cards and other forms of digital incentives. The startup will be introducing a new app next year, for example, that will allow consumers to use their credit card reward points to buy digital gift cards at participating merchants.  The app will take advantage of location-based mobile functionality to give, say, a Bank of America customer walking down a local street in their hometown to instantly receive mobile alerts on which nearby stores will allow them to burn their rewards points. CashStar represents a great way for brands to integrate a turnkey solution that will allow them to quickly increase their revenue from digital gifting and pump up their B2B and B2C marketing and engagement offerings, especially that much coveted customer loyalty. For more, check out CashStar at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Kik is today launching new Symbian and Windows Phone apps at the Nokia World event in London.  The nifty cross-platform messaging app is making its debut on Symbian, albeit in private beta, and the Windows Phone 7 has been updated and redesigned specifically for version 7.5 (Mango). Also see: Why Kik Loves Windows Phone 7 (Spoiler: It Boosts Android And iOS User Growth) The fledgling company behind the Kik Messenger application, which is also available for iOS, Android and BlackBerry, will thus in one fell swoop expand its availability to essentially all five major mobile platforms used throughout the world. The Symbian app, in particular, aims to expand Kik’s reach in emerging markets and regions where the platform is still popular. Currently in private beta, the Symbian app boasts support for sent, delivered and read notifications, group chat with any kik user across all supported platform, and photo sharing. Version 2.0 of the Windows Phone app, meanwhile, takes advantage of Mango’s new features by adding fast app switching, list scrolling, address book contact matching and other improvements. This is what the Symbian app looks like:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Atlassian, the enterprise software company, has really hit its stride over the last few years. Founded in 2002 in Sydney, the company has today built a solid base of 26,000 customers, which include some big names like Facebook, Zynga, Cisco, and Adobe. In July of last year, the startup raised $60 million from Accel to scale and ramp up M&A. Since then, the company has bought Bitbucket and SourceTree to allow developers to host their source code in Bitbucket (or any other hosting platform) and then manage that source using SourceTree.  Since the beginning, Atlassian’s goal has been to create software development and collaboration tools that enable enterprise teams to quickly and easily plan, build, and launch products. The startup’s flagship software products, like JIRA and Confluence, let software development teams take advantage of issue and project tracking in an effort to improve speed of development and code quality as well as giving those teams a single place collaborate, share, and discuss files, minutes, specs, mockups, diagrams, etc. According to Atlassian President Jay Simons, the company is currently seeing 40 percent year-over-year growth and $88 million in revenues (up from $56 million last year). Building on this growth, the company is today announcing a series of upgrades and updates that should be a boon to customers worldwide. For starters, the company has moved into new office space at 7th and Harrison in San Francisco, and it is also launching a complete redesign of its website, which goes live this afternoon. But beyond this, the company is today launching a new SaaS offering called “Atlassian OnDemand”, which will allow software development teams to use the company’s products (including JIRA and Confluence) at a lower, discounted rate. Starting at $10 per month for 10 users, the multi-tenant, cloud-based SaaS essentially allows users of its software to take advantage of its development and collaboration products with the benefit of easy configuration. Taking over for Atlassian Hosted (which the company has been running since 2006), OnDemand will enable customers to integrate third-party applications to beef up power, features, and versatility in their project environments. But the real highlight of OnDemand is that it that it’s a la carte, meaning that users can start with as much or as little in the way of services as they need, adding products as they go. Atlassian’s apps are integrated into current holdings, so that, as a user adds new products, tabs appear at the top of their screen. Links can also be shared between apps, as well as shared navigation, and sharing between systems. OnDemand includes JIRA, Confluence, GreenHopper, Team Calendars, Bonfire, FishEye, Crucible, and Bamboo, as well as free maintenance and upgrades of all apps, and third-party compatibility with Google Apps, Zendesk, Salesforce, uTest, and more. So, with mix-and-match OnDemand offerings, customers can pick and choose the number of users they want per application, starting at $10/month and scaling from there. You can check out the tiered pricing here. It’s pretty cool that now, for Atlassian customers, regardless of what he or she purchases, they’ll be able to take advantage of studio-style integration, single sign-on, consolidated user management, linking, common nav, etc. More on the new Atlassian here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInSteve Anderson on Investing in WeeblyIn part II of Chris Dixon’s interview with Baseline Ventures founder, Steve Anderson, Anderson discusses two of his more successful investments: Heroku and Weebly. Weebly is a startup he led an investment in back in 2007 that helps consumers make websites. Most recently, Weebly launched a professional service to help designers create pages for clients. Weebly may not be a household name just yet, but it’s getting there. Anderson tells Dixon last year “10% of all websites created on the internet were created on Weebly.” Additionally Weebly has purchased new office space and received a large $45 million round from Sequoia Capital (Anderson notes previous investments totaled $760,00). So what drew Anderson to invest in Weebly, especially in 2007 when he says social was the trendy space? In a nutshell he tells Dixon it was the founders’ passion for their product and the belief that “they were creating something of value.” Adding, “if you are creating something of value and you have some technology backing … the chance of having a success at some level are really really high.” Speaking of success, in the video below, Anderson tells Dixon why he put money into another startup, Heroku, a Y Combinator company that helps developers manage applications and was acquired by Salesforce for $212 million. Anderson was introduced to Heroku in late 2007 and says he participated in Heroku’s seed round in 2008, because he liked “the idea of developer productivity and increasing that.” He adds that after helping build the company for two years and erasing “some of the features” (similar to Instagram) Heroku had a roughly $100-million acquisition offer on the table. It wasn’t enough. Anderson says “there was no peer to them at the time and so I became very convinced that we shouldn’t sell.” The end result? Gold. Anderson tells Dixon Heroku “decided to keep going and ironically, nearly 180-days later they sold for about $180-million more” to Salesforce. Make sure to watch both clips for additional insights and view episode I of Steve Anderson’s conversation, here. Past episodes of Founder Stories, featuring discussions with Kevin Systrom, Fred Wilson and David Karp are here. Episode III of this interview is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Ben Horowitz is a partner at Andreessen Horowitz, the former co-founder and CEO of Opsware, and a former Netscape executive. “Yet our best trained, best educated, best equipped, best prepared troops refuse to fight. As a matter of fact, it’s safe to say that they would rather switch than fight.”—Public Enemy, Fight the Power Early in my tenure as product manager for the web servers at Netscape, we faced a terrible crisis. We just got our hands on Microsoft’s new web server, Internet Information Server (IIS), and benchmarked against our product. Microsoft’s IIS had every feature that we had, was five times faster and we knew that they were going to give it away for free. This might not sound so bad, but we had just gone public three months earlier with a story to Wall Street that said, “Don’t worry about Microsoft giving away the browser because we will make money selling servers.” Oh snap. I immediately went to work trying to move the playing field and pivot the server product line to something that we could sell for money. The late, great Mike Homer and I worked furiously on a set of partnerships and acquisitions that would broaden the product line and surround the web server with enough functionality that we would be able survive the attack. As I excitedly reviewed the plan with my engineering counterpart, Bill Turpin, he looked at me as though I was a little kid who had much to learn. Bill was a long-time veteran of battling Microsoft from his time at Borland and understood what I was trying to do, but remained unconvinced. He said: “Ben, those silver bullets that you and Mike are looking for are fine and good, but our web server is five times slower. There is no silver bullet that’s going to fix that. No, we are going to have to use a lot of lead bullets.” As a result of Bill’s words, we focused our engineering team on fixing the performance issues while working the other things in the background. We eventually beat Microsoft’s performance and grew the server line to become a $400M business and we would never have done it without those lead bullets. I carried that lesson with me for many years. Six years later, when I was CEO of Opsware, our toughest competitor Bladelogic started to consistently beat us in large deals. We were a public company and the losses were all too visible. To make matters worse, we needed to win those deals in order to beat the Wall Street projections, so the company felt tremendous pressure. Many of the smartest people in my company came to me with ideas for avoiding the battle: The issue with their ideas was that we weren’t facing a market problem. The customers were buying; they just weren’t buying our product. This was not a time to pivot. So I said the same thing to every one of them: “There are no silver bullets for this, only lead bullets.” They did not want to hear that, but it made things clear: we had to build a better product. There was no other way out. No window, no hole, no escape hatch, no backdoor. We had to go through the front door and deal with the big, ugly guy blocking it. Lead bullets. After nine months of hard work on an extremely rugged product cycle, we regained our product lead and eventually built a company that was worth $1.6B. Without the lead bullets, I suspect we would have ended at about 1/10th that value. There may be nothing scarier in business than facing an existential threat. So scary that many in the organization will do anything to avoid it. They will look for any alternative, any way out, any excuse not to live or die in a single battle. I see this often in start up pitches. The conversations go something like this: Entrepreneur: “We have the best product in the market by far. All the customers love it and prefer it to competitor X.”Me: “Why does competitor X have five times your revenue?”Entrepreneur: “We are using partners and OEMs, because we can’t build a direct channel like competitor X.”Me: “Why not? If you have the better product, why not knuckle up and go to war?”Entrepreneur: “Ummm.”Me: “Stop looking for the silver bullet.” There comes a time in every company’s life when it must fight for its life. If you find yourself running when you should be fighting, you need to ask yourself: “If our company isn’t good enough to win, then do we need to exist at all?” Photo credit: Flickr/Richard Roberson  Latest headlines delivered to you daily PROskore is a newly launched business network that ranks your social media activity and influence in combination with your professional experience in order to give you a score denoting your overall professional influence. At first glance, it sounds a lot like Klout, the popular service that measures online influence. But unlike Klout, PROskore takes into account your business connections and actual work experience in its scoring methodology. It’s also built specifically for business networking purposes, allowing its users to focus on growing their companies. Meanwhile Klout, via its Klout Perks program, is more focused on help brands and advertisers grow their own businesses instead. According to CEO Bill Jula, there are three main differences between PROskore and Klout. To paraphrase: 1) All of its user profiles have been created by people (that is, manually). Meanwhile, many of Klout’s profiles have been imported from Twitter.  2) PROskore is about your professional reputation, but Klout is about your social influence. 3) PROskore is a business network, while Klout is about benefiting its advertisers.  The system is actually more nuanced than a simple “social” ranking. For example, as explained by this company blog post, a Web designer in New York with a score of 45 is not the same as a Web designer in a small town in Georgia with the same score. In other words, scoring and rankings are relative to your region. To create its scores, PROskore uses your social influence (this would be the aspect most similar to Klout), plus your activity on PROskore itself (e.g., the number of connections you have) and your professional resume. When building your profile, there’s a heavy emphasis on adding connections that are related to business, not social influence. For example, it asks you for your Facebook fan page URL, not your personal profile URL. The site’s users can search for other members via the “Find a PRO” section at the top of the site. For those who have filled out what services they offer, this section can help generate leads which are automatically sent directly to your PROskore inbox and optionally forwarded to your personal email inbox. Based in Sarasota, Florida, PROskore was spun out of an existing online business network called Fast Pitch! which had five years worth of revenue and over 100,000 members. However, a large percentage of the former Fast Pitch! members have not completed the profile wizard to generate their PROskore on the newly revamped network. PROskore is currently self-funded, thanks to the ongoing revenue generation that came from Fast Pitch. The company operates on a freemium model, with options to pay monthly, quarterly and annually for access to the site’s advances features, like its automatic leads generation. Paying users can also take advantage of other business-focused apps like the email marketing system and tools for press release creation and distribution. Jula says that the site’s conversion rates are just over 10%. In the short term, PROskore is focused on maximizing its viral growth and will be introducing a half-dozen profile badges for members (although not “cutesy” ones like on Foursquare, Jula assures us). The company has discussed taking in additional funding to improve its marketing efforts, but no decision has been reached. Below, what a PROskore user profile looks like when complete.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Created by a young man named Jonathan Bouman, Scrolldit is a thing that scrolls Reddit for you, thereby allowing you to avoid the hard, hard job of scrolling Reddit. Why, you ask, is this news? Because we like Reddit and it’s really cool. The site essentially takes Reddit feeds (including NSFW ones, hurr hurr hurr) and places them in little boxes that march across the screen. Because most people don’t read too good, there are lots of pictures and the occasional video, available for easy and quick consumption. Most of the rendering happens in the browser and it even feeds in Reddit’s own ads. We’re obviously talking about a mash-up here, but it’s rejiggerings like this that improve interfaces. While I doubt I’d ever use this on a daily basis – the current Reddit interface is good enough with the Reddit Enhancement Suite installed – in an era of popular mash-up apps like Pulse and Flipboard, the desktop hasn’t gotten much in the way of alternative interfaces. The app uses jQuery Masonry and Amazon cloudfront and fetches using the JSON API. It’s unfunded because why would it be? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Music search and discovery startup SoundHound is today announcing its usage numbers for the first time, and it looks like they’re worth touting. SoundHound says that it now sees over 4 million music searches per day and user engagement tops 1,000 hits per second. In addition, the company now has over 50 million mobile users on iOS and Android combined. As a Shazam competitor, SoundHound’s Sound2Sound’ technology searches sound against sound, bypassing traditional sound-to-text conversion techniques. The company is now seeing increasing growth, it says. Over a 30-day period (ending October 20th, 2011), it saw 25 million to 35 million hits per day and traffic peaks at over 2 million hits per hour. This is also when it was seeing those max peaks of 1,000 hits per second. These metrics represent a tenfold increase over last year. SoundHoud recently updated its iOS app to include integration with Apple’s iCloud in order to sync music and search history across all iOS devices. It has also added support for lyrics, voice recognition and Spotify integration to its mobile applications throughout the year. San Jose-based SoundHound is backed by Global Catalyst Partners, TransLink Capital, Walden Venture Capital, and other Silicon Valley investors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Scrappy outsider startup Unthink.com, which bills itself as the “anti-Facebook,” is opening up its doors today, allowing in its first round of beta testers. The Tampa-based company with $2.5 million in funding from DouglasBay Capital sees itself as a more open, more honest form of social networking – one where its users are the owners of their data, and not the product being sold to advertisers. Unthink is the kind of startup that could only come from outside of traditional tech hotspots like Silicon Valley or New York, as there’s a certain level of audacity, and perhaps even ignorance, that you need in order to think you have a shot at displacing social networking giant Facebook and all of its 800 million users. And taking down Facebook is the core of Unthink’s marketing campaign. In fact, the majority of Unthink’s message is about what it is not: it’s not another social network, it’s a social revolution. Unthinkers are not users, they’re owners. Unthink is not in control, you are. And so on. It even has its own manifesto, deeds and covenants.  “If we want to be free, we have to control our own communications…we have to claim that power,” CEO Natasha Dedis shouted with vitriol to the crowd at September’s Tampa Bay Barcamp (the un-conference), before delving into all the ways that Facebook does its users wrong. She explained that the idea for Unthink came to her when her son wanted to sign up for Facebook and she read the terms of service. They were not something she wanted to agree to because they could change at any time. But for her son, that decision was met with a lot of anxiety. “He was really stressed about it, like he didn’t have a choice – he had to be on Facebook.” It was either be on Facebook, or be a pariah in school, she said. Whichever decision Dedis made, she felt like she was being bad mother.  (Above: a profile after sign-up) On Facebook, your personal data, your posts, your likes – in short, all your social networking activity – is used to provide advertisers with a way to directly target precise demographics. Some may call it genius, but for others like Dedis, it feels exploitive. “The number one thing that had to be ‘un-thought’ about social media, is who does it belong to? We need to own everything that we put on our page. We can be as private or as public as we want, as long as it’s our choice,” she said. On Unthink, user data isn’t sold to brands. Instead, users choose a brand to sponsor their page, by way of an ad dubbed “iEndorse.” The idea is that a user will select a brand they feel some affinity with, and will then become an advocate for that brand. Users who don’t want to select a brand have the option to pay for the service instead ($2/year). Brands also have a different way to communicate with fans than they do on Facebook, where messages are spliced into a users’ News Feed. On Unthink, there’s a separate section on users’ profile pages just for communicating with businesses. Users decide what companies they want to communicate with, what type of messages they want to receive and how often they want to receive them. Then, when they choose to interact with a brand, they’re rewarded for their engagement with points that can be used towards discounts and offers from the brand in question. Upon signing up for Unthink, as I did today, you’re offered an app that will export your photos and videos from Facebook. You’re also asked to fill out the standard social networking questions (name, date of birth, gender, etc.) and are then directed to your own personal profile page.  These pages are split into sections, each with a dedicated purpose and easy-to-customize privacy controls. The top section, “iUnthink” is your public microblog, the middle, your social section, the third, your lifestyle section for connecting with brands (this part will launch in a few weeks), and the bottom, your professional section for connecting with business colleagues. Oh, that’s right. Did I forget to mention? Despite its anti-Facebook manifesto, Unthink actually wants to displace Twitter, Groupon and LinkedIn, too. If anything, however, it’s Diaspora done right. Hey, if you’re going to appeal to the “I don’t want corporate control of my data!” crowd, you may as well go all in. Will Unthink take down Facebook? Not likely. But it’s fascinating to watch someone try on this scale. Unthink is launching into a limited beta today. If you know someone who’s in, they can send you an invite. TechCrunch readers can email techcrunch@unthink.com to get to the head of the list.  (Above: full-page profile. Note that ticker would normally be at bottom) Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – BlueCava, a startup that has developed technology that enables its customers to identify unique connected devices such as smartphones, TV set-top boxes, gaming consoles, computers and more, has raised $9.5 million in funding in a round led by VC firm S3 Ventures. Earlier backers, angel investors and billionaires Mark Cuban and Tim Headington, also participated in the round. BlueCava offers device identification technology that enables businesses to improve online advertising effectiveness through smart targeting, and to minimize the risk of fraud. There’s an interesting background story about the tech, which I’ve outlined in a previous post (it involves INXS’ former road manager, Ric Richardson). Brian R. Smith, Managing Director of S3 Ventures, will be joining BlueCava’s board along with Marsh Marshall, Managing Director of Putney Capital and former President of Equifax/IXI Digital, who will serve as the company’s chairman.  Its advisory board already includes people like Joe Sullivan, Chief Security Officer at Facebook and Ellen Moskowitz, VP of Fraud Management Solutions at MasterCard. The most recent financing round brings the total of capital raised by the company to $16 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily UserVoice, makers of tools for managing customer support and feedback, is today launching a new reporting tool for businesses using its “Instant Answers” service. The service, which is built into the UserVoice Full Service system, allows companies to automatically connect their help requests to available Knowledge Base entries in order to provide an immediate answer to incoming queries. With today’s launch of the reporting tool, those companies will now be able to tell how effective their Knowledge Base is at providing those answers to their customers. According to UserVoice, sending customer inquiries to a Knowledge Base (KB) can save on average $4 and 7 minutes of support time for each help desk ticket the KB entry can help resolve. It makes the company’s support processes more efficient, too, since many customers tend to ask the same questions over and over again, but rarely check out the company’s KB on their own, says company CEO Richard White. The newly launched reporting mechanism will now provide companies with more insight into what’s working and what’s not, in terms of the KB redirections. Included in the tool are metrics for the percentage of Knowledge Base entries that are viewed and have successfully averted a support ticket submission, what Knowledge Base articles are viewed most often and what percentage of support requests actually have matching Knowledge Base articles. UserVoice says its Full Service system is now seeing over 30% growth month-over-month in account sign-ups since its launch in March of this year. Pricing plans for the system start at $5 per month for systems with one agent and go up to fully customizable solutions at $125/month per agent. The San Francisco-based company was founded in 2008 and has received $800,000 in seed and Series A funding.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily London-based Just-Eat, the online food ordering company originally founded in Denmark in 2000, is putting the $48 million it raised earlier this year to good use. After taking over local rival, London online food delivery company Urbanbite, Just-Eat’s Canadian business has  acquired GrubCanada. The latter is one of Canada’s first online food ordering service companies, started in 2008 by entrepreneurs Howard Migdal and Ross Lipson. Earlier this year, Just-Eat Canada also acquired Vancouver-based YummyWeb.com. With the acquisition, Just-Eat is able to offer online consumers access to over 1,000 delivery restaurants across Canada, adding 200 new neighbourhood restaurants in Ontario and British Columbia to the stable thanks to the addition of GrubCanada’s business. Terms of the purchase were not disclosed. Just-Eat claims to deliver over 100,000 meals a day and that it has processed more than 30 million orders since the site launched in 2001 (it currently process over 4 million orders per month worldwide for its 20,000 restaurant partners).  The company is backed by Greylock Partners, Index Ventures, and Redpoint Ventures. Latest headlines delivered to you daily With the Groupon roadshow underway and the countdown to its IPO expected to culminate on November 4th, the long-anticipated arrival of the daily deals giant on the public markets is almost at hand. But the journey hasn’t been without its fair share of hiccups. While the company currently owns a 54 percent share of the daily deals market and there were some bright spots in its third quarter earnings report, the daily deals juggernaut has fallen from a once hoped-for $25 to $30 billion valuation to one that will likely be around $11.4 billion. Comparatively speaking, going with that questionable early valuation from its underwriters, at as much as 62 percent off, Groupon itself now represents one helluva deal for the eager coupon clipping investor. Thanks to some hilarious characters on the team at Cat5 Commerce’s Runningshoes.com, we now have an awesome mock deal in which Groupon itself is offering its common stock for the discounted price of $16 a share. To be clear: This deal has not been created by Groupon itself. This was made by a third party for satirical purposes only; though there will no doubt be many that are fooled by the bargain, as the mock deal page captures Groupon’s design and snarky rhetoric with the precision of a well-sharpened lampoon. Next to deals for Pets.com’s sock puppet and sole ownership of Myspace, Groupon’s common stock looks like a steal. I mean, come on, you can now save $24 a share! You simply can’t beat this basement price. Of course, as it goes, these low prices won’t last forever. Or will they? As Runningshoes’ Groupon for Groupon states, “The most opulent offer-you-can’t-refuse offer is smack-dab in front of you. Owning a piece of what Forbes deemed “the fastest growing company ever” will be akin to governing a province in the Roman Empire. People on the street? They’ll know your name. People in buildings? They’ll probably know it, too. C’mon. Make Warren Buffett look like a chump today.” Well played, Runninshoes.com, well played. Especially considering there’s only one small link back to its website hidden down the page, this is meta snarky marketing gold.  Here’s to looking forward to Runningshoes’ roadshow. For those keeping track, the domain, runningshoes.com, was purchased by Cat5 Commerce back in April for $700,000. Update: Apparently Groupon didn’t think this was so funny.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fans of marginalia: Take note. Subtext is a startup that is attempting to bring those incisive notes (or sophomoric jokes) you used to leave in the margins of textbooks or your favorite fiction online — and make them interactive. Subtext is bringing a new social eBook reading experience to the iPad.  If you’ve ever paid the extra cost for a fuller music listening experience, a behind-the-scenes look at the band, a DVD, etc., then you can probably get a sense of what Subtext is trying to do with reading. Except that the startup wants to offer an enhanced reading experience that, while adding neat additions and sidenotes, author commentary, and Web connectedness (for free) — doesn’t distract from the reading experience.  Essentially, this all means that Subtext is offering a reading experience on the iPad that allows users to engage in conversations with friends, community members, as well as authors and experts, even if they’re not on the same page of the text (i.e. reading at the same pace). Readers can get author, expert, and community information, contribute their own thoughts, as well as add and explore links to relevant articles, images, and multimedia content from the webernets. So, in short, Subtext is adding context to the eBook experience through social networking and web-culled content. If you ask me (even though you didn’t), the eBook reading experience is badly in need of a way to make its reading experience deeper and richer, while avoiding becoming the vast, horizontal ocean that, say, constitutes Wikipedia. I love context when I’m reading, and if there is author commentary to be found, I’m not above scouring the Web to find it. Subtext pulls in this kind of supplementary information automatically, providing reactions, commentary, etc. that doesn’t completely detract from the actual reading. Because Lord knows we don’t need more distractions — reading a book on a subway/bus/bike/Segway is distracting enough. What’s more, backing the startup in its endeavor is an impressive list of investors that now includes Google Ventures, Mayfield Fund, New Enterprise Associates (NEA) and Omidyar Network, which have collectively poured $3 million of seed funding into the startup in hopes that this kind of newfangled reading experience can be transformative for eBooks. As part of its launch, the startup also announced that it is collaborating with a bunch of authors backed by well-known publishers like HarperCollins, Hachette, Penguin, Random House, Simon & Schuster, and more. While the first list of books on the Subtext shelf is short (there are 18 books thus far), the list does include some well-known scribblers like Nathaniel West, Amy Stewart, Max Barry, etc., and more lists will be hitting the shelf in the near future. For those who’ve had their curiosities piqued, Subtext’s free iPad app is available on the App Store now. Check it out. Latest headlines delivered to you daily On the heels of inking a major partnership agreement with Adobe, OptiMine Software has secured $3.6 million in a Series B round of funding led by Hummer Winblad Venture Partners. Perhaps the investor is looking to pull off another Omniture (the VC firm invested early in the web analytics and search marketing software company, which was sold to Adobe for around $1.8 billion two years ago). OptiMine offers keyword bid optimization software for large paid-search advertising programs, using predictive analytics to maximize their performance (see demo video below). The company was originally founded in 2008 and went on to raise $1.1 million in Series A funding in a round led by Calumet Venture Fund last year. Calumet also participated in the Series B round. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Can devices like the iPad and even the iPhone be useful learning tools for young kids?  Absolutely, says SmarTots, which has developed a mobile apps recommendation and analytics platform specifically for kids aged 2-7 (and their parents, educators and mobile app developers from around the world). Investors are betting on the mobile education startup to make waves, too: SmarTots has just raised $750,000 in seed funding from Xu Xiaoping’s Zhen Fund, which led the round, and international investors like ChinaRock Capital, SOSventures and Angelvest. Xiaoping is the co-founder of New Oriental Education & Technology Group (aka New Oriental), a publicly listed provider of private educational services in China. With its mobile platform for kids, SmarTots aims to provide parents with a window into their child’s “app world”. Parents can receive reports tracking their children’s learning activities across various SmarTots apps, including subject aptitudes, amount of time spent on specific apps and recommendations for other applications.  In addition, SmarTots delivers teacher advice and educator-developed suggestions for interest-matching and social family activities to reinforce learning. Since its launch in December 2010, the company has clocked over 600,000 downloads. Developers who are interested in gaining access to SmarTots’ SDK, cross-promotion tools and reporting features can sign up here. On a sidenote: Smartots’ CEO, Jesper Lodahl, spent more than seven years working for Nokia, where he developed four phones and created two patents which have been implemented in more than 1 billion mobile phones worldwide.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Job search engine SimplyHired.com, which aggregates jobs listing across the Web, is now adding international professional social network Viadeo to its supported services. The new integration will allow users to see which of their business contacts work at the companies surfaced by job searches on SimplyHired’s website. SimplyHired previously added support for Facebook and LinkedIn to do the same. Viadeo is not as commonly known here in the U.S. as its rival LinkedIn, but it has a fairly good-sized user base of 35 million members worldwide. (In comparison, LinkedIn now reports having 120 million users.) However, Viadeo reached 30 million users back in May 2010, which means that it has grown by just 5 million in the months since. Considering that the company has been targeting highly populated Asian countries like India and China, the opportunity for additional growth is still abundant. In May of this year, Viadeo put plans for its IPO on hold so it could focus on growing its core business. At the time, its Chief Executive Dan Serfaty said it might revisit the question of going public in about 18 to 24 months. The new Viadeo integration goes live on SimplyHired.com in 12 countries today, including Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Mexico, Netherlands, Spain and Switzerland. U.S. users, though, will not have the option. Latest headlines delivered to you daily After some prominent press (and some prominent naysaying), Bitcoin has suffered a bit of a crash, falling from a high in the twenties to about of $3 USD today. Interestingly, however, the intensity with which users, experimenters, and entrepreneurs are still supporting what could best be termed a movement has not waned. The money to be made in this space is in the creation of an intelligent interface for the Bitcoin system. In theory, bitcoin transactions should be completely instantaneous and anonymous. The system records each transaction publicly, ensuring bitcoins can’t be spent again and again, but to watch the records would tell you nothing about the people performing them. It’s this anonymity that allows for the existence of sites like the Silk Road, an online drug and “alternative products” store featuring everything a 15 year old anarchist or average hesher could want, literally sold out in the open (albeit completely anonymously).However, it’s trivial for law enforcement to follow cash into the bitcoin maze and, presumably track the goods as they leave. This is both good and bad: bad because the bitcoin proponents see the eyes of government as tools of great evil and good because it ensures that business could (but may not) begin accepting bitcoin. I explored a few of the possible implementations of bitcoin including Namecoin, a bitcoin-based DNS ownership system that ensures no single name authority can arbitrarily assign or reassign domains – a boon to folks like Mike Rowe. What I found, sadly, is that while the subculture of mining is fairly mature, the tools are opaque for a general user. That’s where entrepreneurs are stepping in. How, then, can the average person begin accepting bitcoin? There are a number of interfaces including an open source app made by bitcoin supporters but folks like Safebit are also hard at work trying to streamline the process.“It’s a very friendly wallet,so non-technology people will be able to use it themselves instead of having an hard time storing their bitcoin,” said Safebit co-founder Or Perelman. These mostly assume that you are not doing your own bitcoin mining but instead want to offer your goods and services in exchange for BTC, a process that would be as familiar to the average merchant as the acceptance of Paypal. That bitcoin is not actually backed by tangible wealth is a concept that is sure to confound the adoption considerably. For example, LaCie’s Wuala currently accepts bitcoin for their services. Another interesting – if derivative – implementation is something that is being called Bitcoin^2, a service that bases the value of bitcoins on “exchanges via the natural energy equivalent value – a variant of barter.” What this means is anyone’s guess although the creator is piggy-backing on the notoriety of the secretive founder of bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto in order to launch their B2B exchange. Without a central authority, the speed with which these offshoots bloom and wither will be considerably enhanced. As it stands bitcoin is not dead. There are many concerns, the primary one explained by Ben Laurie in his paper, “Decentralised Currencies Are Probably Impossible (But Let’s At Least Make Them Eﬃcient).” He wrote: Both Bitcoin and my alternative proposal suﬀer from a problem for which there is no known solution: creating consensus in a group with open, changing membership. But at least my proposal fails in an energy eﬃcient way, unlike Bitcoin.However, if anything is easy on the Internet it’s the maintenance of an open, changing group. Bitcoin was always designed as a proof-of-concept rather than a real monetary exchange and that folks can take cash from it is a happy accident. The goal, then, is to make bitcoin as easy as transferring funds from bank to bank and account to account as well as educating the consumer about its benefits. In the end the naysayers may not be proven wrong but there is some societal value to an independent, open, and ostensibly secure value transfer system, for good or ill. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Shelby.tv, the video-sharing startup (and stars of Bloomberg’s TechStars reality show), is today exiting out of its private alpha phase and launching into a public beta. The service, founded by Reece Pacheco, Dan Spinosa, Henry Sztul and Joe Yevoli, aggregates the video links your friends are sharing across social networks in order to offer you personalized video recommendations. It’s now available in the iTunes app store as a native app for the iPhone or iPad. The new service automatically pulls all the videos your friends share on Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr into a curated video channel with videos you can watch, favorite and then re-share. There’s also a browser bookmarklet that lets you save any video on the web into Shelby.tv for later viewing. The product is dead-simple to use, and enters into the popular (if somewhat crowded) personalized video space. According to a company blog post, the newly launched iOS app has been improved based on user feedback and is now offering improved speed and performance. One notable addition is the new de-duplication feature which smartly removes duplicate copies of videos which have been shared by multiple friends. There are also different ways to filter videos in the app’s guide – by your favorites (the “like view”), by your saved videos (“watch later” view) and by the “timeline view” which shows you all the videos your friends are sharing. At any time, you can pull down on the video guide to refresh your recommendations. Shelby.tv has $1.73 million in total funding, having most recently received a $1.5 million round this summer, from Avalon Ventures and a number of angels. You can learn more about the iOS’s app’s features in the video below, or just download it here on iTunes.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In a high-profile departure, Tyler Lessard quit his job as VP of BlackBerry Global Alliances & Developer Relations at Research in Motion (RIM) at the end of last month. He worked at RIM, a sinking ship, for over a decade. He’s now landed at mobile risk management company Fixmo, the company announced this morning, following a $6.5 million capital infusion secured last June. Lessard will be leading the company marketing and product strategy as CMO. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The new direct-deals mobile advertising marketplace Chartboost is announcing today that it has raised $2 million in Series A funding, after having just launched at the beginning of the October. Investors in this rounded included TransLink Capital, SK Telecom Ventures and XG Ventures, the latter a former investor in Tapulous before its Disney acquisition. Chartboost, too, has a Tapulous connection, given that it was created by former Tapulous employees, Maria Alegre, now Chartboost CEO, and Sean Fannan, CTO. The service they built is not just another ad network but a technology platform providing free ad-serving technology. Developers use the Chartboost SDK to serve ads promoting other publishers’ apps – ads which were typically set up as direct deals. But instead of mediating these direct deals through an ad network, Chartboost publishers get a 100% revenue share on the ads. Chartboost itself operates under a freemium model: the ad-server technology is free when used for direct deals or internal cross-promotion, but the opt-in ad network offers revenue sharing with publishers. The network allows publishers to maximize the unsold direct-deals ad inventory. Notable Chartboost publishers currently include TinyCo, Storm8, Pocket Gems, Gameview Studios, The Playforge, Funzio, OMGPOP, Com2us, Fluik Entertainment, Sunstorm Interactive, Ace Viral, Camigo Media, Neon Play, Lakoo and Devsisters. Alegre says that the new funding will help Chartboost to scale and reach more publishers worldwide, but the company is already profitable.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily “The American Dream,” loosely defined, is made up of a few building blocks. The right to life, liberty, and to pursue happiness. The opportunity to advance, whether through education, sport, entertainment, or enterprise. Perhaps have a family, live in a house, run your own business. Over the past ten years, for a variety of factors, the pursuit of the American dream got significantly harder. Home values have depreciated. It’s more competitive to get into schools. Pinks slips are flying off the copying machine. For many, the dream currently seems elusive. I’d like to focus on one slice of the dream: The ability to run one’s own business. Let’s leave aside venture-style businesses for a minute to focus on local merchants. Enterprising individuals and families across the country typically raise funds from friends, family members, and local banks to open their own local businesses, in part motivated by the opportunity to hold equity, reap profits, and exert more control over their lives. Perhaps household income takes a little hit, but the family can vacation when they want to and make more of the kids’ soccer games. I don’t mean to suggest this all happened smoothly. The local bookstore got squashed by the mega-bookstores, which in turn got served by the endless reach of web retail, which is now currently under threat by social and interest networks. We all know what happened to the small, medium, and large merchants here. No matter how many gimmicks each type of store could experiment with, the fact is that many of them couldn’t compete against the scale and price sensitivity of the Internet. They didn’t have tools to learn more about their customers. And, as a result of these external forces, the transformation of the economy, and the emergence of the “daily deals economy,” many merchants were put on the defensive, scurrying to survive. Mercifully, within the last few years, networks and tools have emerged that offer great hope to small, medium and large physical businesses alike. This is often referred to the as online-to-offline redemption loop, broadly speaking, the idea that networks, new media, and targeted offers can motivate customers surfing the web or playing with their phones to visit a store nearby. The race to grab and close valuable parts of this loop has been staggering, with Groupon finally set to go public in November, with LivingSocial gaining more and more steam, and services like Square and Foursquare focusing on very narrow yet valuable, strategic pieces of the loop. It’s infamously debatable whether or not the daily deals craze is worth it for local merchants, but we’ll have to sit tight and just see what happens. What is not in dispute, however, is that the consumer web, social media, and mobile devices evolved at a rate faster than most local merchants could keep up with. The majority of local businesses are not typically very high margin ones and, therefore, have smaller appetites for risk, so the day-to-day focus in large part is on maintaining inventory and increasing foot traffic through advertising. Therefore, today, even though running a daily deal may place acute stress on a business not prepared for it, new media companies can simply drive foot traffic, and that prospect alone will likely make any merchant in a competitive situation seriously consider it. In a local context, we are smack dab in the middle of a “daily deals economy” that’s here to stay, whether we like it or not. And, offers are going to get more and more targeted, based on a variety of customer and merchant inputs, such as time of day, inventory, and repetition. Now that we are beginning to understand this world a bit better, I’ve noticed an interesting class of new products and services from startups nationwide have emerged to help local merchants better manage their businesses. This is what I refer to as the “merchant-side economy,” where new companies are developing suites of offensive and defensive solutions to help merchants capture more information, optimize traffic, and manage inventory. In this “merchant-side economy,” entrepreneurs are building products and services as “shields” and “swords” to help arm merchants to defend against fights from competition and their customers and get stronger by using new tools. New companies such as Local Response, BizeeBee, RushRez, and ZapHour provide software solutions to help merchants manage inventory, CRM systems, and targeted offers. Startups like E la Carte offer a hardware solution, LocBox allows merchants to create and manage deals, Skipola offers digital ordering, Onepager helps businesses build dead simple websites, and Merchant Button helps merchants manage the deals they want, inverting the model entirely. (There are so many companies sprouting up, it’s impossible to list them all, but please add to the list here.) Larger companies are, of course, keenly aware of the importance of this trend. Google attempted to buy Groupon last year, Facebook dropped into and then out of the daily deals space, LivingSocial has been catching up quickly, eBay acquired Milo, Square built Card Case, and even one of the biggest retail chains in the world, Walmart, got into the game by acquiring Kosmix. As media attention shifts from television tubes to new media and mobile channels, retailers have more options to grab online traffic and convert it into real foot traffic, and once they are in the store, startups like Prism Skylabs and Shopkick can help create new in-store experiences. These are the swords and shields in the new merchant-side economy, products and services that help store owners handle the daily deals economy, compete for foot traffic, capture more information about existing and potential customers, and leverage the scale and precision of new media companies to provide better consumer experiences and, hopefully, to keep that one very important slice of the American dream from fading forever into the darkest shadows cast by the growth of new Internet media, advancements in technologies, and the harsh realities of globalization. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInSteve Anderson on Founding Baseline VenturesSteve Anderson’s Baseline Ventures has invested in startups that include Instagram, Heroku, and Weebly.  (Earlier this month, Baseline took part in a $1-million seed round for Crashlytics.) It took him only four weeks to raise $100 million for his curernt fund.  In this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Anderson discusses investing in Instagram and what led him to become Baseline’s founder in 2006. Anderson tells Dixon that after working for companies including Microsoft, eBay and Starbucks he was ready to strike off on his own. However, he lacked the roughly half-million to start his company and was not interested in trading a sizable chuck of his ownership (40-50%) to secure financing from a Sand Hill Road VC. Anderson says “the reality also was on Sand Hill Road everyone talks about the billion-dollar exits, and if you look at the history of the last 15 years, there has not been that many billion dollar exits … it turns out that the average exit over the last 10 years on average has been $100-million, and so I was thinking to myself well if I owned 10% of a $100-million outcome that is real money for me, and my co-founders and anybody else and so why isn’t there anybody whose capital was aligned and incented for that outcome?” Recognizing a fertile revenue stream, Anderson started investing in companies while allowing founders to maintain more ownership than they otherwise may have with traditional VC. Dixon tells Anderson, “you were, I think, ahead of the curve.” One of the companies Anderson attached himself to early on was Instagram. In the below video, Anderson tells Dixon that during Instagram’s infancy, “we didn’t know exactly how tight to be, but we knew directionally we were going to head towards photos and location and social network.” The initial idea though wasn’t nearly as important as who was behind it. Anderson continues, “I was really involved with betting on Kevin (Systrom) early, helping him recruit Mike Krieger who is his co-founder and those two guys have just run with it.” Anderson notes, “this is why I am in business, to find people like Kevin, to start at the earliest of stages.” Make sure to check out the entire video for additional insights, and watch Kevin Systrom’s Founder Stories interview here. Past episodes of Founder Stories, including interviews with Eric Ries, Kevin Ryan and Dustin Moskovitz are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We here at TechCrunch love startups, and we love the programs, networks, accelerators, and funds that help these startups grow and take over the world. There are a lot of them out there, and for entrepreneurs, it’s all about finding the right fit. First Growth Venture Network, also known as “FGVN” or “First Growth”, may not be as well known as awesome accelerators and incubators like Y Combinator, TechStars, LaunchBox, or DreamIt but the New York City-based startup incubator has a lot to recommend it. Especially for very early-stage startups that haven’t raised any outside funding. For starters, application to the venture network is free and, if the startup is accepted, there’s no enrollment fee. What’s more, the accelerator doesn’t take equity, your company doesn’t have to be located in NYC, nor is it required to have raised funding to be eligible. First Growth is looking for companies that have raised less than $1 million. All applicants need is a business plan, a PowerPoint deck explaining their mission to take over the universe, target market, why they’re disruptive etc.  Like other accelerators, First Growth offers its participating startups the opportunity to participate in classes, which focusing teaching founders the important business and product strategies they’ll need to take their ideas from seed to market. These classes and sessions are led by industry experts, VCs, angels, and other entrepreneurs, and are supplemented by networking events, meetings with advisors, and so on.  The list of advisors includes VCs and entrepreneurs like Joshua Abram, Partner, Coriolis Ventures, Co-Founder Media6Degrees & AdSafe, CFO of Yext Alok Bhushan, Kleiner Perkins Partner Eric Feng, Accel Partner Sameer Gandhi, North Bridge Ventures Principal Dayna Grayson, Spark Capital Principal Mo Koyfman, Michael Lazerow, Chairman and CEO, Buddy Media, and College Humor Media CEO Paul Greenberg.  Today, First Growth is announcing its Fall 2011 lineup and the fourth “vintage” of its startup accelerator program, which will include sixteen young companies looking to go pro. In its inaugural batch of fifteen companies back in 2009, ten of the startups were able to attract funding by the time of their “graduation”, along with one acquisition. In its second vintage, seven of the ten startups had received funding by graduation. It’s encouraging to see this kind of success rate for an accelerator in the now burgeoning New York tech scene. Especially as First Growth is taking a somewhat unique approach in that it’s not trying to make money off of its startups. As First Growth Founder and Executive Committee Chair Ed Zimmerman told us, the accelerator is “exciting in its un-cola approach: We don’t take equity, it’s free for the companies, and there’s no demo day. Instead, it’s simply about building a community of companies and advisors that lead to long-term success”.  Furthermore, Zimmerman said that roughly 70 percent of the network’s startups have gone on to get funding, and the under-the-radar accelerator has already hatched startups like Birchbox and FanBridge that have attracted some high-profile investors and a few big numbers to boot. Not bad at all. So, without further ado, here is an introduction to First Growth’s newest batch of startups:  105 Looks is video-centric website for makeup. Founders and Caroline Marcus Dahllof use video to show women how to increase their style points and what products to use to do so. The goal is the offer a superior alternative to traditional ways of learning about makeup products and how to use them. 105 Looks’ weekly “Trend Guide” covers the latest trends and provides inspiration for trying new looks, along with videos that show how to make them come alive.  72Lux is a personalized destination site that allows users to shop multiple high-end retailers from a single location, with a single checkout. It also licenses this universal checkout to provide enterprise publishers with a turnkey ecommerce solution and new revenue stream.  Frustrated by an experience looking for a specific dress online and with the technical knowledge that a better, more luxurious experience was possible, founder Heather Fitzpatrick resigned from her job to found 72Lux Inc. in 2009. The 72Lux team also includes Jason Cain and Michelle Montgomery.  Adaptly is an easy way to advertise across the social web. The company allows businesses to create ads and deploy them across multiple social ad platforms instantly. Until now, every social network had its own distinct set of data, ad formats and advertising platforms, so advertisers and media buyers had to broker individual deals with each network.  Adaptly opens up these walled gardens, providing one simplified social media ad buy to reach the 1.5 billion people on social networks, monitors data in real time, and delivers actionable insight. In April 2011, the company, founded by Nikhil Sethi andGarrett Ullom, raised a total of $2.7 million in seed and Series A funding from First Round Capital, Charles River Ventures, Kirschenbaum Bond Senecal & Partners, and Lerer Ventures. (You can read our coverage here.)  Artsicle is a web-based art rental service for consumers, small businesses and interior designers. The company curates the best pieces from emerging artists at the top MFA programs. It asks potential customers to fill out short quiz to start discovering the art they’ll love. Then, Artsicle’s curators put together a personal gallery for browsing. Clients can try the art for as little as $25/month and earn credits towards purchase. Artsicle co-founder and CEO Alexis Tryon is the site’s connector guru, finding collectors and artists, while co-founder and CTO Scott Carleton is chief geek.  Binksty is a comprehensive online personal finance tool that helps uses organize and pay their student loans. Binksty launched in private beta in October 2011 and now manages nearly $1 million in student loans. In 2009, Binksty’s founder Brendon McQueen graduated from Columbia University with 12 loans and over $100,000 in debt. He realized how frustrating organizing his student loans was and began to envision a real world tool for people who are fed up with wasting time, energy and money. (Read TC’s coverage of Binksty here.)  irrive is a social travel application that consolidates the past and future plans and destination recommendations of a members social graph into one clean, actionable UX. Irrive was founded by Steven Cohn.  Jagimo/Woern is a mobile social network that plays like a game. Users can share ideas and photos in a realtime, spontaneous, game-like environment with people from around the world. Toss a jagimo, and random people catch it and add their own ideas and photos. Once you catch a jagimo, you then have five minutes to retoss. The name Jagimo! is a play on the Japanese word for potato, “Jagaimo”, and thus an allusion to the early “Hot Potato” idea. The company is overseen by President and iOS developer, Erich Wood.  Keaton Row is an online platform that leverages technology to bring the traditional stylist-client relationship to the masses, while creating a far-reaching and quality distribution channel for brands. It is launching with a focus on the professional women’s wear market, offering a personalized selection of work wear, pieces and outfits delivered virtually by a Keaton Row stylist. Co-founder and President Cheryl Han was formerly head of the online division for Clarins, where she was responsible for Sales, Marketing and Online Business Development.  OpenFin is a secure, cross-device app platform designed exclusively for the financial community. The platform makes it easy for financial providers to deliver apps to users on tablets, smartphones and desktop. The company was co-founded by CEO Mazy Dar and President & COO, Chuck Doerr.  StyleOwner is making it super easy and fun for anyone to create an online store and personalize it for their social network by curating from an amazing catalogue of more than 2,000 fashion brands. “STYLEpreneurs” provide friends with customized recommendations and make a 10 percent commission on every sale. The company seeks to make the web shopping experience more personal. Founder and CEO Joel Weingarten realized that by combining the best marketing tool (a recommendation from a family member or friend) with the power of social media, StyleOwner could empower people to become entrepreneurs.  Shopperseeks is a demand-based marketplace for clothing and accessories. By focusing the shopping experience on the customer, Shopperseeks makes online ordering more efficient for shoppers and retailers. Founder Andrea Gouw is an fashion an ecommerce veteran, having worked for companies including May Company and walmart.com. The site is currently in Beta.  Tidal Labs is a platform that identifies the best content from tens-of-thousands of the best online contributors and connects them to publishers or brands. The company powers fashion look-books for Teen Vogue, Zagat and Neutrogena. For Conde Nast, publisher of Teen Vogue, the platform produces ten times the editorial-quality content for 1/5th the cost of a staff editor. The platform was developed by founder Matthew Myers.  TreSensa is building an HTML5-based game development platform that enables developers to author, publish and monetize casual/social games across the Web, mobile devises and connected televisions. The platform will provide support for games across the entire life cycle ofgame development, driving significant efficiencies and increased monetary opportunities for large, mid-sized, small and independent game studios. TreSensa was founded by CEO Rob Grossberg, President Vincent Obermeier and CTO Rakesh Raju.  Tutorspree is a marketplace for local tutoring. The company has tutors across the United States focused on academic subjects ranging from Elementary School Math through Quantum Physics. The company launched in January 2011. Currently there are over 160 tutors signed up in four cities: San Francisco, Washington, New York and Los Angeles. Tutorspree was co-founded by CEO Aaron Harris, Ryan Bedner and Josh Abrams.  Venmo is a mobile payments platform designed to payments between friends simple and fun. Iqram Magdon-Ismail and Andrew Kortina, met as freshman year roommates at The University of Pennsylvania and built Venmo because it was difficult for them to exchange money with each other, and they wanted to improve this experience for everyone.  Yabblr is a platform to unite consumers around products they want to buy to pull deals from brands, the reverse of the prevailing model of marketer pushed deals. Co-founders Jeff Zaresky, John Garbarino and Bryan Migliorisi are levering combined years of experience helping brands develop social media marketing programs to disrupt the current deals model and is creating new efficiencies for both consumers and marketers. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past week, I’ve been testing the alpha version of the Everpix service, which aims to automatically centralize and organize all your digital photos, both online and off. I’m happy to report that, so far, it works as advertised. In case you missed it, Everpix, a creation of ex-Apple engineers, was one of this year’s TechCrunch Disrupt finalists. Using a small utility that runs on your computer, Everpix lets you connect to your local photo stores, online services like Facebook, Flickr, Picasa and Instagram, and even to the photos sent to you in Gmail. Given that two of Everpix’s Co-founders, Pierre-Olivier Latour and Kevin Quennesson, each spent several years with Apple (Co-founder Wayne Fan was previously at frog design), it’s no surprise that Everpix is launching first for Mac users. To get started, you install a utility that places an icon in the Mac’s menu bar. Initially, the syncing may slow your computer down a bit as it uploads your entire photo library.  For that reason, it might be a good idea to get the upload started before bed so it doesn’t interrupt your work. Clicking the Menu Bar icon will take you to the Everpix website, where you can configure the various services you want to connect to, as well as point it to which folders on your desktop contain photos you want to sync online.  For those of you with complicated folder-within-a-folder systems for organizing photos on your computer, you may be a bit disappointed to find that with Everpix you can’t choose to upload only a selection of folders or files. You must either globally enable or disable your entire Pictures folder (or optionally, your Documents and Desktop, too). However, I’d argue that, for most people, this will be a feature, not a bug. In providing fewer choices in terms of what can be synced, it simplifies the setup, reducing the amount of clicks it takes to get started. (You click the icon, go to “Photo Sources” then click the folder you want online. That’s just two clicks). In my case, though, the folder I use to save photos that appear accompany blog posts is in my Pictures folder, and I had no desire to include these alongside my family photos on Everpix’s website. I will be forced to relocate that folder elsewhere, it seems. By default, all your photos are private and will always remain private unless you specify otherwise, so unless you have some really personal photos, I wouldn’t worry too much about having them posted online. Of course, seeing a secure URL (i.e., one beginning https://…) would make me feel a bit more comfortable. From the Everpix website, you can choose to enable additional online photo-sharing services, all of which connect using OAuth or, in Facebook’s case, Facebook Connect. The one big disappointment here was Gmail. Despite the fact that Gmail added support for OAuth back in March 2010, Everpix straight up asks you for a Gmail username and password, noting that it will store your encrypted password or its servers. No thank you. When a better method is available, there’s simply no reason to handle things this way. I chose not to connect my Gmail, and will not do so until OAuth is supported.  As for the organizational aspects to the service, Everpix does as promises – it groups photos together by “moments.” These moments are periods of time representing life events. For the most part, I found photos grouped by date, but in some cases, it knew to separate the group of photos I took during the day from those taken later at night. One wish I had for the “Moments” feature was a desire to manually combine some of these groupings into one. For example, photos from a conference like TechCrunch Disrupt were spread across multiple days, when I’d rather save it as one moment. Since all the photos are fairly recognizable to the human eye as belonging to the same group (i.e., green background, conference stage), it’s clear there’s no super-intelligent machine algorithm handling the groupings.  The other big feature, auto-curation, I liked more. In large photo sets, the service will run through the batch and hide (not delete), bad photos like those that are blurry, out-of-focus, dark, or under or over exposed.  You can return these photos to view with one click at the bottom of the page. And to keep the photo unhidden for good, just click the arrow icon on the photo.  The best feature of all is Everpix’s simple privacy settings. As noted above, all photos are private by default, but with one click, you can change that. With a toggle switch at the top of the page, an album (or select photos in an album) can be made accessible via a provided URL which you can share with Facebook, Twitter or via email.  Overall, despite the service’s simplicity, there are still many features Everpix lacked. For example, photos that appeared in landscape when they should be portrait aren’t rotated for you and there’s no mechanism on the site to do so. (Sure, that’s probably how they appear on the original site, too, but it mars the experience.) The forthcoming mobile interface for Everpix is also a much-needed addition, as it would provide the means to actually have your photos on hand wherever you are, plus provide a much simpler method for automatic uploads from your device. That’s in development, though, so it’s only a matter of time. I’d also like to name some of my moments, tag them or search them by people, places, dates or subjects, but search is not provided at all. It would be great, too, if Everpix could pull in the face tags that iPhoto and Facebook already have and combine them – that would truly be a feat worthy of praise. I imagine that these are the kind of things Everpix is working on next – they would be crazy not to. A comprehensive photo database needs to be searchable and structured, not just organized and pretty, I’d say. The company still doesn’t have details regarding pricing or a public launch, but in the meantime, I’m fairly happy to have this resource on hand. Before now, my photos had been widely spread out across the Web forever, with no easy way to centralize them. For that feature alone, Everpix is a tool worth having, in my opinion.   Everpix is accepting registrations here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco-based HiGear, a peer-to-peer car-sharing service focused on luxury vehicles, is expanding to L.A. starting November 1st. The move is part of the company’s continued expansion plans that will see it arrive in five additional markets, including Portland and San Diego, by year-end. Unlike other car-sharing services, HiGear specializes in “high-end” auto brands only, including Mercedes, BMW, Audi, Aston Martin, Lamborghini and Tesla. Owners of these high-end cars can rent their vehicles to other drivers for fees that are, on average, 50% off commercial rates. Meanwhile, everyday drivers get a chance to finally drive their dream car without the burden of ownership. HiGear provides comprehensive liability and collision insurance and performs member screening, which includes driving record checks and sometimes even credit checks. It also collects a security deposit in order to “encourage safe and fair use of members’ cars.” In additional to the rental fee ($125-600, depending on the car), drivers pay $20-40 per day in rental insurance. The average rental period is for 3 days, or around $410. In HiGear’s case, the transfer of keys from owner to renter is not an automated procedure involving lockboxes, but actually has the members meeting up in real life in order to coordinate the transaction. Despite this hassle, the company says it now has an “inventory” of 200-plus cars and is adding new vehicles at a rate of 50-plus per month. Earlier this month, HiGear raised $1.3 million in seed funding from BV Capital, Battery Ventures, 500 Startups and angles including Zipcar investor Craig Sherman and Kevin Chou. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Groupon has taken a lot of heat over the last six months, some of it deserved, some of it perhaps a bit excessive. There are definitely legitimate concerns about Groupon’s value for small businesses and merchants, but lofty valuations aside, we have to remember that Groupon is still a young company, and the future remains unwritten.  The daily deal giant’s IPO roadshow is scheduled to kick off next week, and ahead of that, Groupon released an updated SEC filing on its upcoming IPO, in which it announced that it plans to sell 30 million shares at $16 to $18 a pop, which means that it has to raise between $480 million and $540 million — all resulting in a valuation potentially as high as $11.4 billion.  Now, while Andrew Mason wearing a suit and a tie while pitching to potential investors is enough to make anyone nervous, the daily deals behemoth has taken some positive steps of late, namely its closing of the redemption loop with Groupon Rewards. Read Erick’s analysis here. That being said, is it all sunshine and moonbeams for Groupon at present? It’s enormous valuation might lead one to see it as such, but the company shared its Q3 stats today, which were buried in its updated SEC filing. As one can see from the graphs herein, compared to Q2, revenues are up 9.4 percent in Q3 2011 (to $430 million), which is certainly a good sign. However, going further back, this represents a slowdown from 32.7 percent Q2 over Q1 growth and 72 percent growth Q1 over Q4.  On the other hand, gross billings actually grew 24.5 percent Q2 over Q1, resulting in $1.15 billion for the quarter. And “Cumulative Customers” hit 29.5 million this quarter, up from 23 million in Q2, all in the face of a decreasing marketing spend and income (loss) from operations dropping from $101 million in Q2 to $239,000 in Q3. Below, we see that Groupon’s income losses from operations had been growing from Q2 2010 through Q1 2011, and remained high in the second quarter of this year. The third quarter of this year, Groupon’s most recent stats show, represent a significant cut in operating losses, and while Groupon remains in the red in this category, the trend is certainly positive. One thing worth noting, however, while far from being dishonest, is certainly conspicuous (and slightly annoying): You will notice in the ninth slide that Robin posted this morning (from Mason’s presentation to investors) gives a jumbled look at the map of significant competition Groupon is facing in the daily deals space. BUT. But, where is LivingSocial, I ask you? Yes, based on the numbers Erick shared in September, Groupon continues to hold the lion’s share of the market at 54 percent, but LivingSocial isn’t exactly just a piddling little lemonade stand on the corner. LivingSocial owns at least 22 percent of the daily deal market, which you would think would give it a more prominent position on Groupon’s “map of competitors”. At this point, The New York Times has a bigger title than LivingSocial, which is pretty ridiculous. Hopefully, that’s just another example of Groupon’s “awesome” sense of humor.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Andrew Mason (30), who co-founded Groupon and currently serves as its CEO, hasn’t often been spotted wearing a business suit and tie. But when you’re pitching investors on an initial public offering, looking to raise over half a billion dollars at a $11.4 billion valuation, I guess you kinda have to. This morning, Groupon’s IPO roadshow video presentation was published and is publicly available here (via The New York Times). Unfortunately, the clip can’t be embedded, but if you’re interested in learning how Mason and other Groupon executives will be pitching investors on the company’s IPO, it is well worth your time. I’ve embedded some screenshots of the investor presentation slides:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Chupa is a newly launched mobile app component marketplace that joins the ranks of sites like TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Verious and Appcelerator’s Open Mobile Marketplace. However, there is one key difference between competitors’ sites and Chupa: in addition to native applications (iOS and Android), it also supports a variety of frameworks, including Appcelerator’s Titanium, PhoneGap, JQuery and Sencha Touch. Like Verious and Appcelerator’s Open Mobile Marketplace, the idea with Chupa is to help developers speed their time to market by offering app components they can license and use in their apps for a fee, instead of having to write their own code. Based in Italy, Chupa was first launched in July as an invitation-only marketplace, where it quickly acquired over 300 mobile app component developers wanting to sell their code on the site. It’s now exiting its private beta period and is open to all as a public beta. The site lets you browse, search and filter the listings by platform (iOS, Android, Titanium or Web app) and it further breaks down the components into categories based on function (e.g., utilities, audio, image, video, navigation, UI elements, etc.). Prices appear to be reasonable, with some components available for as little as $12.00 (USD). Unfortunately, it appears that although support will be provided for a wide variety of platforms, the site is still lacking an abundance of actual code. Many of the sections are currently empty, making Verious the better choice for now for those looking for sheer quantity in terms of resources. (Verious launched with 1,000 listings, for example, while Appcelerator launched with 50).  Developers who write app components themselves can list them on Chupa for sale. Chupa took a 20% commission on component sales during its private beta, which is in line with the offer Verious was providing to its charter members. (Verious may go up to 40% over time, however). Appcelerator, meanwhile, takes the standard 70/30 (developer/app store) split, which is what Chupa is listing on its site now. Chupa was founded by Stefano Argiolas and Paolo De Santis, who are also the co-founders of Dlite, a multimedia digital marketing company which has previously provided mobile campaigns to brands like Nike, Renault, 20th Century Fox and Nokia. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Usabilla, makers of usability testing tools for websites, is today launching a new mobile tool that lets companies test how their apps or mobile websites perform on the iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch or Android devices. The new tool overlays questions or notes on top of the mobile app or website’s user interface, like “where would you click to filter the search results?,” for example. The testers can then tap a part of the app or mobile site’s webpage in response. As the testing takes place, Usabilla’s mobile web UX (user experience) tool collects the aggregated feedback from the participants, analyzes it, and presents it to the site’s designers using charts and heatmaps. To set up the tests, designers and developers must either provide the mobile URL or a screenshot of the mobile app. It does not support live app testing, however. But the tool does have a unique social feature – it lets you recruit participants to join the test by posting links to Facebook and Twitter. You can see an example of the tool in action in the video below or take a sample test for yourself by clicking here. Usabilla raised $1 million in funding earlier this summer, in a round led by Dutch venture fund Boralis and five undisclosed investors. The company’s customers now include Disney, Levi’s and Electronic Arts. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I love finding services that bring value to small businesses. Viewbix falls squarely into that category.  ViewBix comes from the founders of Qoof, who gave agencies and advertisers a way to easily create interactive videos. The need for customization, however, tended to bring a lot of friction to the selling process.  For SMBs, it was pretty much completely out of scope. This was frustrating for Qoof’s founders, who were noticing growing demand in that vertical.  Viewbix was created to dramatically reduce the aforementiond friction that came with customization, allowing videos to be wrapped-up in a variety of features quite effortlessly. Here’s how it works:  Step one is to select an existing video. ViewBix currently supports YouTube, Vimeo and Facebook video. Step two is to customize the player in terms of colors, size, call to action, etc. Step three is really where the promise of ViewBix resides: interactive features that can be easily added to videos, including music, additional videos, photos from services such as Facebook, Flickr & Picasa, and more. The ones I found most compelling for a small businesses are the ability to include a Twitter feed, eBay auctions, coupons, and Skype integration.    Once the player is created, it can be embedded and shared anywhere, including inline on Facebook. It will even display in HTML5 on mobile devices (iOS and Android). You can check out ViewBix in action, here and here. Viewbix tracks every action that occurs in the player, so more savvy users can dig into the data and optimize their players with the best performing apps. The service is based on a freemium model with a base product that is currently free. In the near future, Viewbix plans to charge  a monthly fee, starting at $14.95/mo, for branded players, premium apps and detailed analytics.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily And so it begins. Groupon this morning published the expected price range of its shares, to be sold in an upcoming initial public offering, in an SEC filing. The daily deals company plans to sell 30 million shares at $16 to $18 a pop, which would see Groupon raise between $480 million and $540 million. This would give Groupon a valuation as high as $11.4 billion. As rumored yesterday, the Chicago company will trade on NASDAQ, under the ticker ‘GRPN’. Groupon filed to raise $750 million in its IPO back in June 2011, but has since scaled down the offering substantially as many industry watchers have raised valid concerns about its accounting practices, the sustainability of its business model and the fact that the company has seen its share of executive departures recently. The market is also weak, overall. There is one huge silver lining. The revised prospectus shows that Groupon is actually nearing profitability, as revenues are rising and marketing expenses are dropping. The New York Times offers a detailed look on the company’s updated financials, which are suddenly looking remarkably strong. Who’d a thunk it? Andrew Mason, that’s who. Perfect timing, too; Groupon’s IPO roadshow is expected to kick off next week. Latest headlines delivered to you daily GroSocial, a startup that makes social media marketing software, announced today that it has closed a $450,000 round of seed funding, led by the Kickstart Seed Fund, with additional contributions from Monarch Ventures, Rock & Hammer Ventures as well as several angel investors. With its new funding, the startup adds three members to its board of directors, including angel investor Curt Roberts, Monarch Ventures founder and managing director JD Gardner, and Chris Russell, managing director of Rock & Hammer Ventures. The Utah-based startup offers social media software to SMBs and enterprises to help them find new customers and supplementary revenue through social networking platforms like Facebook and Twitter. So far, thousands of businesses across 17 countries have signed on to use GroSocial’s products. To help these companies get more bang for their marketing buck, the startup has created tools like “Customizer” to enable quick design of personalized Facebook pages through the ability to choose from 70 fonts, colors and gradients, strokes, background images, banners, etc., as well as over 20 widgets, which enable teams to add viral promotions, images, text, buttons, forms, videos, and more to their Facebook tabs. The startup also recently released a “Customer Enterprise” service, built on its flagship Customizer platform, to let larger organizations grow their brands by running custom-designed promotional tabs across their partner networks on Facebook. In turn, the platform enables those partner companies “to realize the benefits of being associated with a larger brand and to leverage that brand by promoting sales, running customized contests or promotions, distributing coupons or adding highlight videos”, the startup said in its funding announcement. In other words, with products like Customizer, businesses can add a whole mess of social media features to their Facebook and Twitter pages to supe up those channels and make them more powerful marketing vehicles. For example, Customizer allows businesses to add dynamic forms to their Facebook page (like embedding MailChimp or AWeber forms, for example) as well as take advantage of analytics that enable them to track their custom Facebook tabs by tab views, how many “likes” each tab receives, etc. GroSocial also offers several other social media products designed to help businesses increase social media engagement, like Follower, a proprietary platform that allows teams to build a legitimate Twitter following without having to do any work themselves. While this sounds like a scam, the company claims that by simply following tweeters within the same target market they are able to find those who are significantly more likely to follow and pay attention to your business. In one such example, GroSocial was able to increase a brand’s Twitter following from zero followers to 2,600 in two months.  Other GroSocial products include “Bootcamp” and “Swap”, which give users on-demand access to a series of social media marketing training videos and the ability to gain organic social media publicity by swapping posts with influencers of similar brands on Facebook Fan pages, respectively. At first brush, these social media marketing tactics don’t exactly seem profound, like they might even have come from these guys, but so far they seem to be having real results for SMBs. For the little guys, who don’t have a lot of time or resources to train a social media team, or spend a lot of time managing and building Twitter feeds and Facebook pages, simple, easy-to-use social media software can go a long way. For more, check GroSocial out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this week, UberMedia (and Idealab) CEO Bill Gross launched a new product at the Web 2.0 Summit called Chime.in. It is an interest stream for following people and things you care about. You can even follow part of a person (only what they share about tech, and not what they share about cats). Gross gave me a demo of the iPhone app, which you can see above. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFoursquare CEO Dennis Crowley: “The Daily Deal Companies Are Version 1.0”In Part II of my TCTV interview with Foursquare CEO Dennis Crowley, we get down to brass tacks: How will Foursquare make money?  (In Part I, we talked about Radar, Siri, and how mobile interfaces are changing).  Foursquare is already experimenting by partnering with various daily deal companies, including Groupon, to show nearby local deals to Foursquare users.  But Foursquare is ultimately taking a different approach.  “”The daily deal companies are version 1.0 of great things you can build with the Internet that help local merchants drive foot traffic into the door.  What we are doing with Foursquare is version 2.” Groupon is great at driving lots of customers into stores, he acknowledges, “but there is always a question of whether they are repeat customers.”  Foursquare is focused more on loyalty—identifying loyal customers and rewarding them (with Mayor and Check-in specials).  Crowley thinks the bigger opportunity is to give local merchants the data to segment their customers.  People who check in a lot are loyal, those who don’t check in any longer are lost (and maybe there are ways to bring them back), and people checking into similar places in the vicinity are good potential prospects. “The best thing about Groupon and Livingsocial is they taught an army of merchants that there are better tools,” says Crowley.  “We know we are going to be very good at helping merchants identify their best customers and building the tools that drive new customers into the business.” With Radar and Explore, Foursquare is starting to recommend places to go.  I asked Crowley if there would ever be paid recommendations popping up in Foursquare.  It is not something he is planning, but he did not rule it out.   Of course, Groupon is also trying to come up with ways to reward loyalty and not just first-time visits.  I pressed Crowley on what many see as Foursquare’s biggest weakness.  There is no way to tell whether people who check in actually buy anything.  Foursquare needs a way to close the redemption loop between an offer and a purchase.  “We have thought of different ways to get involved in the payment process,” says Crowley.  One way is to strike more deals with credit card companies like its AmEx deal, which offers check-in specials redeemed at purchase by swiping your credit card. Foursquare is working on getting some of that transaction data so that it can help merchants determine which promotions work and which ones don’t. (Watch Part I of this interview as well). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Vanity phone number provider Zoove is today announcing it has raised an additional investment of $5 million from Rogers Ventures to help it further accelerate its U.S. operations. The startup is the exclusive provider of “StarStar numbers” (e.g. **FLOWERS) for the four largest mobile operators in the United States, reaching over 250 million consumers. Mike Lee, VP of Roger Ventures, the venture capital arm of Canada’s Rogers Communications, will also be joining Zoove’s Board of Directors as a part of this deal. StarStar numbers, which are maintained in the Zoove-powered National StarStar Registry,  let consumers dial a company more easily than with traditional numbers and without an additional fee. Recently, StarStar numbers have been used in promotions from the NFL (**NFL), Simon’s Cowell’s X-Factor (**XF) and EA’s new Madden game (**MADDEN). After the consumer places the call, they will typically receive a text message or voicemail prompting them to opt in to engage further by viewing websites, downloading apps, downlading coupons, etc. The participating brands pay Zoove an annual fee for their number which varies based on length and scarcity of the number. This current round brings Zoove’s total funding to $20 million. It had previously raised $15 million in Series D  this August. That round was led by new investor Panorama Capital, plus existing investors Cardinal Venture Capital, Highland Capital Partners and Worldview Technology Partners. Below, a TV commercial featuring a StarStar number for the NFL: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fresh off a $40 million raise, flash sales site for home décor, furnishings and accessories One Kings Lane, is bringing on a new CFO from eBay, Dinesh Lathi.  In his new role, Lathi will lead finance, operations and customer service for the retail asite and will join the company’s management team.  Previously, Lathi was employed by eBay where he spent nearly seven years. He most recently served as vice president of managed marketplace and seller experience and was a member of the global marketplaces executive staff.  While at eBay, Lathi and his team were responsible for a number of the core marketplace products including the Top Rated Seller Program, Buyer Protection, Fashion Vault, Daily Deal, Store Subscriptions and Zero Insertion Fees.   Lathi also served as CFO of RingCentral, a cloud-based enterprise phone systems provider; and was CFO of Industrial Container, a company that offers new and reconditioned steel, plastic and fiber drums. Lathi holds an MBA from the Harvard Business School and a BS in Materials Science from MIT.  As the Wall Street Journal reported recently, One Kings Lane is on track for over $100 million in 2011 sales, and is valued at $440 million. Now that the company is making real revenue, a CFO to manage the financial side of the business is necessary.  One Kings Lane, which just hit 2 million users, is proving that a niche vertical in the flash sales arena can bring in meaningful revenue and a loyal customer base. The company has also been able to use entertainment and celebrity partnerships to boost traffic and sales. Over the summer, One Kings Lane featured a content deal with Bravo’s Million Dollar Decorators, and teamed up with actress Gwyneth Paltrow to promote her new cookbook. Of course, Gilt is also trying to grab a piece of this market, recently debuting its new Gilt Home vertical.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily BuyWithMe, a daily deals startup that had been acquiring companies right and left this year, appears to be going under. The startup has failed to find funding and is now laying off half its workforce. CEO Jim Crowley announced yesterday that at least 100 people will be let go today unless the company finds a last minute buyer. According to a report by BetaBeat (and several tipsters here), the company was unable to raise the funding it needed. BetaBeat, who spoke to an unnamed employee, reports that BuyWithMe tried to raise a hundred million dollars at a $500 million valuation. The valuation was too high, and the company had no takers. The layoffs are only the beginning of what may be shaping up to be a bad situation for this company, which is out of money and, according to one source, “folding.” BuyWithMe made its sixth acquisition in September, with its purchase of San Francisco-based TownHog . It previously acquired NYC’s Scoop St, Chicago deals site DealADayOnline, San Francisco deals site Swoop, loyalty company Edhance, and deals site LocalTwist. It had raised $21.5 million from Bain Capital Ventures and Matrix Partners. Update: BetaBeat reports today that the company tried to buy its way to growth, but it was “all for show.”  Update #2: Here’s the official statement from CEO Jim Crowley: BuyWithMe did have a significant reduction in staffing this week. We did this so the company is in the best position to continue to serve its merchants and members. As an organization we’re continuing to pursue our business and to support our customers throughout the country. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You, too, can be just like Hard Harry, dropping the truth on your neatly manicured suburban hellhole from the privacy of your sweat-stinking bedroom. Tell the man off. Rail against the principals. Get the FCC on your tail (not really.) Because FlipZu is here to help you build your own pirate radio station. The browser based app (Android and iPhone versions are also available) lets you broadcast live. That’s basically it. You press a button, perform a mic check, and start railing against the Illuminati and the Bilderberg Group. People can listen to you live or they can listen to your previous recordings. Founded by Dario Rapisardi and Lucas Lain, both based in Argentina. Their blog includes instructions (in Spanish) about how to build a radio station using the app and a few pieces of software. “We started it a little bit over a year ago, me and a college friend, self-funded. We just recently got a small private investment from a local investor – $150,000 – so we incorporated and we’re hiring a couple more people soon,” said Dario.When asked if the product would scale when things get hairy, Dario wrote: “You shouldn’t have any issue using it in an event. The platform is being used by President Correa of Ecuador to give his speeches on aregular basis, it was used by former President Lula of Brazil, and it’s being used daily by one of the most popular radio shows in the city,” he said. “In unusual high-traffic circumstances the platform will scale up (we’re on Amazon, and the streaming platform was built from scratch with EC2in mind).” This idea isn’t new. BlogTalkRadio has been doing this for a while, although they’ve focused on the call-in method of recording and transmitting. FlipZu is also fairly limited in terms of media availability and downloads right now although you can create an RSS feed of your recordings, thereby creating a podcast feed for various media players. It could be a great way to run live interviews at events and surreptitiously record Apple press conferences.I tested it out a few times here and once I’m ready to start recording my survivalist rantings between 2am and 5am every night until the Elder Americans return to Earth from the Moon, I’ll let you guys know. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BlueStacks, the startup that has developed software to let Android users run their apps on all Windows PC, tablets, and laptops, is announcing this morning that it has closed a $6.4 million series B round of financing. The round was led by AMD, Citrix Systems, and included participation from existing investors like Andreessen Horowitz, Ignition Ventures, Radar Partners, Redpoint Ventures, and more. BlueStacks raised a $7.6 million series A back in May. The company plans to use its new funding to accelerate development of its app player (currently in alpha) and “Cloud Connect Service”, which together consists of free, downloadable software that essentially give users one-click access to Android apps on any Windows PC, tablet, or laptop — as well as the ability to view these apps in full-screen mode. The recently released public alpha of BlueStacks’ “App Player for Windows”, which we covered last week, has already been downloaded in more than 100 countries, and the beta release of the app player is scheduled for this winter, in addition to a “Pro” version of the product, which will include access to premium Android apps like Fruit Ninja and Cut The Rope.   BlueStacks’ technology works seamlessly with AMD APU-powered tablets and PCs (hence the company’s investment in the startup), which means that Android apps can take advantage of the horspower and graphics capabilities of the APU on many of the x86-based systems that run on Windows and the suite of Microsoft Office apps.  The startup is hoping to define the next generation of IT architecture for enterprise, and hopes to help push the industry towards being able to run mobile apps ubiquitously, enabling users to work and play from anywhere, on any device. With 250,000+ Android apps available through Cloud Connect, and 30-odd featured apps available for users to quickly grab and demo, so far, it’s already a great step forward for Windows and Android. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Founded by Dave Morin, the co-inventor of Facebook Connect, Sean Fanning, the co-inventor of Napster, and Dustin Mierau, the co-inventor of Macster, Path has some serious street cred when it comes to social and sharing. What’s more, there was the impressive list of investors backing the photo-sharing app in November of last year, and the sizable series A follow-on investment led by Kleiner Perkins in February.  At about the same time, Google reportedly tried to buy the startup for $100 million+, to which Path collectively said “no, thank you”. The Google acquisition offer was likely a play at scooping up an impressive, design-oriented team and a high-profile former Facebooker would have been a nice addition.  Yet, though Path may have been showing Zynga-like engagement early on, the question has been whether or not Path could scale and find user adoption before it ran out of money. Those questions have continued to be hurled at Path, but today CEO Dave Morin put some of the speculation to rest, announcing from the stage at The Web 2.0 Summit in San Francisco that the app is nearing 1 million users. For those unfamiliar, Path is designed to help people share moments from their lives in context and in small, tight circles of friends and family. Path focuses (and will only continue to do more so) on one’s “trusted relationships”, which is why users are only able to share with 150 people — at most. It’s a sharing model that many victims of Facebook’s sometimes complicated privacy settings and trend of over-sharing can get very excited about; however, Google+ is really trying to do the same thing and will provide some serious competition for Path going forward, whether the founders want to acknowledge that or not. Over the last 90 days, 3.4 billion photos have been uploaded to Google+, and Vic Gundotra and Sergey Brin both said from the stage today that Google’s social network is designed to be more like interacting socially in real life. You don’t share everything with everyone. Of course, Path is all about the mobile sharing experience. And when Path 2 arrives sometime in the not-so-distant future, you can count on the new version continuing to privilege simplicity, intimacy, and ease of sharing. On stage today, Morin said that mobile users find themselves in many moments, where they want to talk to loved ones or family members about first dates, injuries, etc., and that these kind of moments are not always appropriate for Twitter or Facebook shares.  Thus, the startup wants to be the alternative path to mobile sharing. Privacy and intimacy first and foremost. But Path 2 better have some exciting new features, because Google+ will only continue to add integration with Google Apps, work in APIs, spread further across mobile, and at that point, Path may be in trouble. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Lytro “focus later” camera has created a lot of interesting discussion on the web. With photography still in many ways the same as it was a century ago, this new way of capturing images has certainly struck a nerve. I’ve voiced my skepticism, but I wouldn’t want to pour cold water on this truly innovative device on its big debut. In case you’ve forgotten, the Lytro allows you to shoot a picture with minimal effort, then adjust the focus to your liking later, among other things. At an event in San Francisco today, CEO and originator of the Lytro’s light-field technology Ren Ng showed off the device, which only resembles traditional cameras in that it has a lens and LCD screen. It’s really more like a kaleidoscope than anything else. The front sports an F/2 lens with an 8x zoom — it was not specified whether that F/2 persists throughout the zoom range, but based on my understanding of the technology, I think it has to (update: yes, the f/2 is constant). Neither was the 35mm equivalent for focal length given. On the other end of the device, which is 4.4″ long and weighs only 8oz, there is a 1.46″ LCD touchscreen on which you can frame the shot and explore previously shot images. There are only two buttons on the device, one for shutter and one for power, plus a slider for zoom. You certainly have to give it to their designers: whether you like the shape or not, it’s unique-looking and practical in a way. The Lytro will come in two versions: $399 buys you an 8GB version (blue or grey) that holds 350 shots; $499 gets you a red 16GB version that holds twice that. This works out to about 22 megabytes per shot, which is comparable to many RAW shots being taken on DSLRs today. The actual “megapixel” value is hard to determine, and Ng described the camera as capturing “11 mega-rays” to an LFP file. I’m thinking that the final images are likely not that large in terms of square dimensions, but of course that square would contain far more data than a square JPEG. The specs say “HD quality,” which of course means very little. Notably, the pictures you take will be able to be hosted on Lytro’s site for free. Let’s hope they can scale that. They’re shipping in early 2012, but some questions remain. How long does the battery last? How does it hand low-light situations (we can’t take the F/2 lens at face value, though it’s certainly bright)? How will the photos be displayed — Flash, some kind of custom container? Will there be apps? And did they spend all of that $50 million? The camera is available for pre-order now at Lytro’s site.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco-based Liftopia, an online retailer of lift tickets and mountain resort activities, is today announcing it has raised $1.3 million in a round led by First Round Capital. New investors in today’s round also include Dave Morin and Chris Sacca, who participated with existing investors Erik Blachford and Sam Shank. Today’s investment brings Liftopia’s total raise to nearly $3 million. In short, Liftopia wants to do for ski lifts and other mountain-related activities what OpenTable did for dining reservations, the company says. It’s now working with 150 resorts across North America in an estimated $5 billion market. Europe, whose market is around four times the size, is also on the startup’s future roadmap. For those unfamiliar with the service, Liftopia lets you buy your lift tickets online and in advance. By doing so, consumers can save up to 80% off the walk-up rates for the lifts. Resorts benefit too, by insuring against volatile weather conditions, snow conditions and other events that may keep skiiers away from the slopes. The resorts participate in the system for free, but for each transaction, Liftopia keeps a portion of the revenue. The company says that over the past year, transaction volume and revenue have grown in the triple digits. Currently, participating resorts are located in California, Colorado, Utah, New York, New England, British Columbia and Quebec, such as Park City, Winter Park, Aspen, Deer Valley, Snowbird, Mammoth, Kirkwood, Stowe, Sun Valley, Taos, Snowshoe, Mont Tremblant, Killington, Sunday River, Banff and Whiteface. Investors in today’s round include, as noted above, First Round Capital, Sacca and Morin, as well as Sand Hill Angels, Sam Shank (founder of HotelTonight and TravelPost) and Erik Blachford (early Expedia employee and the former CEO of Expedia, Inc./IAC Travel; investor in Farecast, Zillow, Hipmunk and Room 77). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at The Web 2.0 Summit in San Francisco, Founder of Khan Academy, Salman Khan, took the stage to share a few quick stats on the growth of his online video education platform. For those unfamiliar, Khan Academy is, as John Batelle noted this afternoon, one of Bill Gates’ favorite educators. It also happens to be one of mine, but I thought you’d probably resonate a bit more with Bill Gates. But Khan Academy is the institution of Salman Khan, who brought the idea of educating young people, self-starters, people who learn at their own pace — online. “Educational”-type YouTube videos have now been around for years, but Khan Academy’s repository is pretty ridiculous. The educational startup now counts over 2,600 videos in its library, with sessions or classes on everything from arithmetic to physics, including 211 practice exercises, to let students watch videos and learn at their own pace. While Khan is a not-for-profit organization, the Academy has received donations from The Gates Foundation and also won Google’s “Project 10^100”. With the $2 million+ from Google and Gates in pocket, Khan told the crowd at Web 2.0 today that the academy is seeing 39 million pageviews and 3.5 million unique users per month. That 3.5 million unique users is up 309 percent year-over-year. It looks like all the publicity and traction Khan Academy has been getting of late is really starting to pay off, which is great to see. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kevin Rose took the stage today at the Web 2.0 Summit to give a demo of Oink, the first product from his mobile lab, Milk.  He’s talked a bit about it before, but went into more details today.  “With Oink, we wanted to build a platform to rank things,” he explains. Oink is a mobile app that lets you rank things in different places.  So instead of ranking a restaurant or point of interest, you can rank specific things at those places.  Rose showed an example of one of his favorite places, The Samovar Tea Lounge.  On Oink, you can rank the different teas at the lounge, and see how they rank against the other teas there and teas you can get nearby.  Everything is based on hashtags like #tea, and each type of #tea is ranked by place or within a geographic radius.  You can chose to find the best #teas within 1 mile, 5 miles, 25 miles, etc. And they all show up on a map. “You can rank an item like Matcha tea,” explains Rose, “or add it to to-do list.”  You can see if your friends have voted it up, rank it by tag, or by best #teas within a 5-mile radius.  You can rank anything, best #chocolates, #rollercoasters, #massages.   The more your friends vote up the things you rank, the more cred you get.  So people can see where you rank among your friends for #teas, or #chocolates, or #rollercoasters.  In that way, they can get a sense of whether you have any taste in those areas.  Once Oink gathers enough rankings for enough things, it can start recommending things to you based on your location (kind of like Foursquare is doing with Radar). Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDmitry Shapiro Shows Off AnyBeat (1,000 Private Beta Invites)If there is a theme emerging among new social startups, it is layering an interest graph on top of people’s social connections (aka, the social graph).  Bill Gross’s new product Chime.in is all about filtering your stream by interest.  Sean Parker’s new still=stealthy startup Airtime will also, I suspect, be organized around interests.  The first person I ran into at the Web 2.0 Summit, Dmitry Shapiro, is also working on a social network based around interests.  Shapiro, who was the founder of Veoh and did a stint as CTO of MySpace Music, gave me a brief demo of his new social network, AnyBeat in the video above. Anybeat is a social network designed to help you meet new people, as opposed to Facebook which is more about interacting with people you already know.  It is based around interests which you can follow.  There is also a realtime chat component where you can see everyone else who is online and interested in the same things, as well as a Q&A database organized around interests.  You can sign in with your Facebook ID, or take on a pseudonym.  Sometimes pseudonyms can help you express who you really are.  “Facebook is not a place where you go to have open conversations,” says Shapiro. Do we really need a new social network?  I am not sure.  But Anybeat is exploring some interesting new areas in social networks.  The amazing thing about Anybeat is that it was built by three engineers.  And this is the second version of the product.  the first one was organized around different circles of friends, but then Google+ came out.  It is still in private beta, but I have 1,000 invites which you can sign up for here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest contributor Eric Ries is a consultant and the author of The Lean Startup. Drew Houston is featured on the cover of Forbes magazine as the entrepreneur who out-Steve Jobs’ed Steve Jobs. He just raised $250 million for DropBox (as he explains in this TCTV interview). His success is well-earned, as Dropbox continues to earn its reputation as one of Silicon Valley’s hottest companies.  But what these stories tend to leave out is that Drew has spent years doing the unglamorous work building not just a great product, but a great company. I’ve been happy to host him at the past two Startup Lessons Learned conferences, where he’s shared candidly the lessons he’s learned along the way. One of the techniques he used to validate the concept for Dropbox is so powerful – and so simple – that most entrepreneurs overlook it. It’s an example of building a minimum viable product (MVP). I call it the Dropbox MVP, in Drew’s honor, and I devoted a section of my new book (The Lean Startup: How Today’s Entrepreneurs Use Continuous Innovation to Create Radically Successful Businesses) to it, which you can read below.  I’ve also included links to slides & video below  to Drew’s two presentations at sllconf 2010 and 2011. They are both a must-watch for any aspiring tech entrepreneur. A minimum viable product (MVP) helps entrepreneurs start the process of learning as quickly as possible. It is not necessarily the smallest product imaginable, though; it is simply the fastest way to start learning how to build a sustainable business with the minimum amount of effort. Contrary to traditional product development, which usually involves a long, thoughtful incubation period and strives for product perfection, the goal of the MVP is to begin the process of learning, not end it. Unlike a prototype or concept test, an MVP is designed not just to answer product design or technical questions. Its goal is to test fundamental business hypotheses. The lesson of the MVP is that any additional work beyond what was required to start learning is waste, no matter how important it might have seemed at the time.The Dropbox MVP  Drew Houston is the CEO of Dropbox, a Silicon Valley company that makes an extremely easy-to-use file-sharing tool. Install its application, and a Dropbox folder appears on your computer desktop. Anything you drag into that folder is uploaded automatically to the Dropbox service and then instantly replicated across all your computers and devices.The founding team was made up of engineers, as the product demanded significant technical expertise to build. It required, for example, integration with a variety of computer platforms and operating systems: Windows, Macintosh, iPhone, Android, and so on. Each of these implementations happens at a deep level of the system and requires specialized know- how to make the user experience exceptional. In fact, one of Dropbox’s biggest competitive advantages is that the product works in such a seamless way that the competition struggles to emulate it. These are not the kind of people one would think of as marketing geniuses. In fact, none of them had ever worked in a marketing job. They had prominent venture capital backers and could have been expected to apply the standard engineering thinking to building the business: build it and they will come. But Dropbox did something different. In parallel with their product development efforts, the founders wanted feedback from customers about what really mattered to them. In particular, Dropbox needed to test its leap- of- faith question: if we can provide a superior customer experience, will people give our product a try? They believed—rightly, as it turned out—that file synchronization was a problem that most people didn’t know they had. Once you experience the solution, you can’t imagine how you ever lived without it. This is not the kind of entrepreneurial question you can ask or expect an answer to in a focus group. Customers often don’t know what they want, and they often had a hard time understanding Dropbox when the concept was explained. Houston learned this the hard way when he tried to raise venture capital. In meeting after meeting, investors would explain that this “market space” was crowded with existing products, none of them had made very much money, and the problem wasn’t a very important one. Drew would ask: “Have you personally tried those other products?” When they would say yes, he’d ask: “Did they work seamlessly for you?” The answer was almost always no. Yet in meeting after meeting, the venture capitalists could not imagine a world in line with Drew’s vision. Drew, in contrast, believed that if the software “just worked like magic,” customers would flock to it. The challenge was that it was impossible to demonstrate the working software in a prototype form. The product required that they overcome significant technical hurdles; it also had an online service component that required high reliability and availability. To avoid the risk of waking up after years of development with a product nobody wanted, Drew did something  unexpectedly easy: he made a video.  The video is banal, a simple three- minute demonstration of the technology as it is meant to work, but it was targeted at a community of technology early adopters. Drew narrates the video personally, and as he’s narrating, the viewer is watching his screen. As he describes the kinds of files he’d like to synchronize, the viewer can watch his mouse manipulate his computer. Of course, if you’re paying attention, you start to notice that the files he’s moving around are full of in- jokes and humorous references that were appreciated by this community of early adopters. Drew recounted, “It drove hundreds of thousands of people to the website. Our beta waiting list went from 5,000 people to 75,000 people literally overnight. It totally blew us away.” “To the casual observer, the Dropbox demo video looked like a normal product demonstration,” Drew says, “but we put in about a dozen Easter eggs that were tailored for the Digg audience. References to Tay Zonday and ‘Chocolate Rain’ and allusions to Office Space and XKCD. It was a tongue- in- cheek nod to that crowd, and it kicked off a chain reaction. Within 24 hours, the video had more than 10,000 Diggs.” (You can watch the original video here: http://answers.oreilly.com/topic/1372-marketing-lessons-from-dropbox-a-qa-with-ceo-drew-houston/ and see the original reaction from the Digg community here: http://digg.com/software/Google_Drive_killer_coming_from_MIT_Startup.) In this case, the video was the minimum viable product. The MVP validated Drew’s leap- of- faith assumption that customers wanted the product he was developing not because they said so in a focus group or because of a hopeful analogy to another business, but because they actually signed up. At Startup Lessons Learned 2010, Drew summed up his experience with this single slide:  And here are both of Drew’s presentations: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Backupify, the startup that provides online data backup, archiving and export, is today releasing a new version of its Backupify Snapshot tool with additional features for Google Apps admins. The tool, for those unfamiliar, allows Google Apps administrators to extract and download the complete Google Apps account for a departing company employ and save the data locally. Previously, Snapshot was in public beta – it’s now being commercially released to all. Traditionally, when an employee left an organization, the I.T. department would backup their files and folders, disable their Exchange mailbox and export their mailbox .PST file. Now, as companies of all sizes are transitioning to the cloud, termination procedures on the I.T. side have also changed. Unfortunately, because there’s not a simple process for exporting and archiving a user’s Google Apps data, companies will often just keep the account open but unused. That, however, can lead to an additional expense, as Google charges by seat. With Backupify Snapshot, the idea is to recreate the same sort of account termination procedures companies are used to, but for cloud-based services. The tool compresses a user’s Google Apps account data (Gmail, Docs, Calendar, Contacts and Sites) into a Zip file that can then be downloaded to a local machine or server. The Google Apps account can then be safely deleted. The killer feature in today’s release is the added support for multi-user and batch downloading – that will be a huge timesaver for I.T. during those times when there’s more than one employee account to export. (Layoffs, anyone?) Snapshot also improved support for large organizations via better search, introduced a referral functionality that will dole out free downloads for those who refer their friends and added Google Checkout as a payment option. (Snapshot users get only 5 free downloads, then have to pay $10 per download). Backupify Snapshot is available both as a standalone service and as a part of Backupify’s Google Apps Backup service. It has been used by over 500 organizations since its release last month. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Crowdpark, a Berlin-headquartered game developer, announced today that it has raised $6 million in series B financing from top German venture capital firms, Target Partners and existing investor, Earlybird Venture Capital. Waldemar Jantz, partner at Target Partners, will be joining the startup’s board as a result of the investment. The new round of funding brings Crowdpark’s total to $8 million. Why should you care? Well, Crowdpark is aiming to give gamers their fix of legal gambling, er, betting. Using its patented “dynamic betting” technology, Crowdpark enables forecasting in realtime for social gaming in much the same way the brave among us play the stock market. Unlike its social gaming competitors, the German startup allows gamers to compete against each other in betting events using virtual currency. This includes the opportunity to bet on real world events taking place in everything from sports and entertainment to news and technology.  Other developers in the larger category of casino games have mostly focused on slot machines and card games (read: Poker, Blackjack), bingo, or roulette. Unlike, say, Zynga Poker, Crowdpark’s “Bet Tycoon” brings live betting to Facebook, allowing you to challenge your friends to bet on a wide range of realtime events, with each bet becoming an opportunity to move up the rankings, show off to friends via social networks, and rack up virtual currency. Generally speaking, betting is a one-time only event (as you have to wait until the event expires to reap what rewards may come), but Crowdpark lets users bet throughout the lifecycle of a sporting event, for example. And since the winnings are all based on virtual currency, no real money changes hands, it’s all legal — and avoids that shady “gambling” moniker. Crowdpark also thinks that it can offer a great value proposition for its users by building a cross-platform social betting service. While online gambling and betting companies are eager to move into Facebook, Crowdpark is already there with Bet Tycoon (as well as the Web), and will soon be offering a mobile game for Android and iOS where bets can be made instantly on your smartphones and tablets. Crowdpark plans to use its new round of funding to speed up the development of its cross-platform functionality, develop new games, and ramp up hiring to build on the early success of Bet Tycoon, which is currently seeing around 500K monthly active users on Facebook.  As for a sneak peak at the kind of games Crowdpark plans to release on mobile? A game called Fanatical, which is currently in development, targets sports fans in such a way as to combine Foursquare with realtime, location-enabled betting. This means that users will be able to check in wherever they are, through their platform of choice, placing bets, collecting badges, joining in on friends’ bets, and issuing challenges to everyone else using the app at TGIFriday’s. From betting on who will win (or score the most goals) in a FC Barcelona/Real Madrid match to what Obama’s approval rating will be by the end of the week, to who will get voted off American Idol, the topics are diverse — and users can cash out at any point to redeem their points for virtual currency. The platform also includes the “Crowdpark Social Betting Index”, updated weekly, to reveal insights on top-trending bets, and who’s raking in the most cash. For more on Crowdpark and its social betting platform, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily GramercyOne, a New York City-based provider of cloud-based business management and marketing software, has secured $14.5 million in Series A financing. The funding round was led by Revolution Ventures (which is chaired by AOL founder Steve Case) with participation from Grotech Ventures, TDF and Jubilee Investments. Launched in 2010, GramercyOne offers a product called Booker Platform, a swiss army knife of software tools that enable companies to attract and reach out to customers through social commerce, group buying services, mobile and local advertising and social booking solutions. The company says it currently provides cloud services to over 2,500 companies across the globe (56 countries and counting, with eight languages supported so far). Its customers range from small-sized service companies like local spas, fitness centers, beauty salons and whatnot to big organizations such as Hilton Worldwide. GramercyOne claims its Booker Platform is currently used to process over 700,000 transactions – averaging $1 million in value – every day. Says Revolution Ventures’ president, Tige Savage: “GramercyOne allows the e-commerce revolution to move from the sale of products tothe sale of services.  The company’s leading applications finally make it as easy to purchase and schedule a service appointment online as it is to purchase a song or a book online.” Savage will be joining GramercyOne’s board of directors together with Grotech’s Don Rainey; the two also serve on the board of LivingSocial. Interestingly, GramercyOne was started after its SpaBooker platform was carved out as a business division within SpaFinder, a major spa media and marketing company.  According to the company, the functionality required to enable online scheduling of spa appointments was starting to gain traction outside of the spa industry, and thus the SpaBooker division was spun out in to what is now GramercyOne.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily NYC-based Blueprint Health, a health-focused member of the TechStars Network, has just opened applications for its inaugural program starting on January 9th, 2012. This accelerator program is the only TechStars member to exclusively concentrate on healthcare. The program plans to offer access to a large network of healthcare entrepreneurs, VCs and innovators. Its current mentors include those who have founded and helped lead companies like Amicas, Eliza, Everyday Health, Generation Health, Healthination, HelloHealth, Keas, Kryuus, Livestrong, MedCommons, Medivo, PatientsLikeMe, Phreesia, ShapeUp and ZocDoc. Blueprint also has employees from CVS, Johns Hopkins, Johnson & Johnson, Kaiser Permanente, Lockheed Martin, McKinsey Hospital Institute, Take Care Health Systems, Pfizer and WebMD on board. Its investment partners are Aberdare Ventures, ATV, Bessemer Venture Partners, Google Ventures, Highland Capital Partners, HLM Venture Partners, Milestone Venture Partners, Physic Ventures, Psilos and Radius Ventures and Windham Venture Partners. Startups interested in participating in Blueprint’s program will be focused on technology products for patients, doctors, hospitals, pharmacies, health plans or employers. However, it will not be as focused on consumer-facing apps looking to gain traction. The group says its not opposed to helping first-time entrepreneurs or those without healthcare experience, given the right vision. It’s also not opposed to single founders, but having a strong team increases a company’s chances of getting selected. Those accepted into the program receive $20,000 in cash and will be provided with office space in New York during the 3-month program. Free legal support, financial counseling, HR support and, of course, mentorship is also provided. In exchange, Blueprint takes a 6% equity stake in the company. More details and the online application form are available on the Blueprint Health website. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ken Goldberg, a professor of New Media, Robotics, and Industrial Engineering at UC Berkeley, launched an interesting new startup from the stage of The Web 2.0 Summit in San Francisco today, called Hybrid Wisdom Labs. The startup, according to its founder, has emerged from “more than a decade of robotics and social media research at UC Berkeley”, resulting in today’s launch of its patented “Collaborative Discovery Engine”, a scalable way for companies to rapidly generate realtime insight from their customers and employees. To date, the technology has been used by General Motors, Unilever, Humana, and the US State Department, Goldberg said. The idea for this new collaborative engine stems from the fact that most tools companies are using to gain intelligence from social media end up being list-based discussion interfaces that don’t scale well and quickly grow to unmanageable proportions, the founder said.  To combat this problem, the discovery engine combines thousands of ideas from brainstorming, social media, and robotics, runs them through a variety of analytic algorithms, before presenting them in a dynamic visualization format that allows companies to easily discover which ideas are important — and what they should be focusing their resources on. The value proposition: Scale and speed. According to Goldberg, the engine can scale to support thousands of users without sacrificing the speed required to quickly find the best solutions to a company’s problems. As one can see from the image above, each visualization is focused on a key topic, or question that a company has about its product or strategy, for example. Circles, or really, “blooms”, emerge in the visual rendering (i.e. graphical map), which represent a new idea or response proposed by participants. The positions of the blooms in relation to each other are based on the relevance of the opinion (or idea) to like-minded ones, and the color and size of the bloom represents the number of “likes” or positive responses the idea is generating.  Using sliders that represent two dimensions (how much they agree with AND how insightful they find the response), users then evaluate the responses, presumably resulting in a more robust analysis than the simple “thumbs-up” or “thumbs-down” pervasive to social media’s evaluation of preference. As the reputation algorithm processes further responses, the least important ideas fade into the background, and the more popular (or commonly occurring) ones take visual precedence, leading to a deeper look into collective customer intelligence. As to how beta testers have responded? According to a company statement, released via its website: “In January 2010, Hybrid Wisdom partnered with a leading Fortune 50 manufacturer to find insightful solutions into how they could improve their brand and reputation. The Collaborative Discovery Engine engaged 1,200 of their most valued customers. After a few weeks, the most valuable insights were reported back to the company, including users’ desires around extending warranties to convey confidence in quality and stability. Both the company and the participants were extremely pleased. In a follow up survey, 95% of users indicated that they would be “Extremely Likely” to participate again”. For more, check out the company at home here. Let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This afternoon at The Web 2.0 Summit, Pandora Co-founder Tim Westergren sat down with Fortune Editor Adam Lashinsky to talk about what’s going on at everybody’s favorite personalized radio platform. For those who may have missed it, Pandora recently enjoyed a relatively high-profile IPO, putting its “P” ticker symbol right smack in the middle of “IPO” — and the NYSE. And its stock has remained pretty high, both literally and figuratively, pricing at over $16 a share on its opening day, and is today trading around $15.20 per share. So far, so good. Furthermore, today the company counts 37 million active users and, as Westergren has said on multiple occasions, is finally hitting scale. Part of the reason that the co-founder believes that the company has been able to reach scale, and continue to grow across mobile and the web, is due to the fact that the entire industry is shifting from broadcast/terrestrial radio to personalized radio.  Of course, Westergren is wont to say that this shift is endemic to an entire industry, as Pandora has really been at the forefront of pushing personalized radio across different forms of media. And, based on its mobile adoption in particular, where Pandora reaps 70 percent of its users, it doesn’t look like Westergren is wearing rose-colored glasses. Another interesting statistic the co-founder mentioned today was that Pandora currently has over 900,000 songs in its repertoire, and the majority of those songs were played last month — one of the biggest differences between traditional and new radio, where the diversity of the musical catalog is far smaller.  Therein lies Pandora’s value proposition: Allowing listeners to personalize their radio experience, as well as exposing listeners to a wider breadth of artists, songs — and, in turn, giving artists a far longer reach than ever before. To this point, Westergren said, “new” radio is helping the long-tail, by playing more songs.  And, it’s important to note that Pandora pays to performers. While this may hamstring the platform a bit financially, it’s great for musicians. Terrestrial (or broadcast) radio only pays publishing fees, which go to composers and record labels, but not to performers. Musicians rejoice. But, what about Spotify, you ask? Revenue from subscribers only made up about 15 percent of Pandora’s revenue in 2011; the majority of its revenue is based on advertising. While Westergren said that the company needs to do a better job of monetizing through advertising in the long run, so far most of its users are cool with listening to the free, ad-supported version rather than subscribing to take advantage of ad-free listening. Spotify, on the other hand, is predominantly subscription-based, but Westergren said that he thinks there’s room for both companies to survive and do what they do best. Ideally, he says, a Pandora power user “would find some songs they like on Pandora, and then go buy them on iTunes or listen to them on demand via Rdio or Spotify and use them in tandem,” he said. “It’s not 100 percent distinct, there’s obviously some overlap, but I think at a high level the place where we operate in the minds of users.” Spotify, with its Facebook integration, has been exploding in the U.S., but for those looking for a one-button, low maintenance way to discover music based on their own distinct tastes, Pandora remains one of the best options out there. We’ll see what the future holds, but I’m willing to bet that both services will be around for at least a few years. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at Web 2.0, John Batelle sat down with Bill Maris and Graham Spencer of Google Ventures for a quick peek inside Google’s venture arm. For those unfamiliar, Google Ventures’ team of 43 invests up to $200 million a year and in 2011 will make upwards of 100 investments. The value proposition of Google’s venture wing is that, according to Maris, it’s highly focused on engagement with the startups they’re investing in, and, of course, partnerships and Google resources are always close at hand. While Google Ventures doesn’t invest specifically to further Google Inc’s products or development projects, the team consists primarily of former Googlers — not to mention former entrepreneurs, investors, and scientists. But what’s probably most interesting about the venture firm is that it’s really taking a Moneyball approach to investing in startups. What does this mean? Moneyball, the book (and now film) that looks at the changing role of statistics in major league baseball and how clubhouses utilize their data to determine the value of players. Billy Beane, the book’s protagonist, was able to build an Oakland Athletics team of undervalued (and many would say questionable) players for cheap and take that team all the way to the playoffs. Google Ventures, too, is all about the data. Beyond being able to help teams solve their UX, search, and scaling issues, the team takes hopes to mix both qualitative and quantitative data to put together the best approach to deciding in which startups to invest. According to Maris and Spencer, Google Ventures applies data tools and metrics to their prospective investments to decide which opportunities make the most sense. Naturally, as the team at Google Ventures itself (and their mothership as well) is home a full roster of computer scientists, engineers, machine learning specialists, and more, there’s really no surprise that Google Ventures would be applying a data frame to the problem of what spaces and areas are most ripe for investment.  They take investment heuristics and the many qualitative rules of thumb investors use to make their decisions, and apply software they’ve built themselves to build models, test theories, etc. So along with being able to take advantage of Google-based analytics, search query-type knowledge, and so on. The venture partners cited DNAnexus as one of the companies they’ve invested in most recently that both reflects their data-based approach as well as their strategic effort to find startups that are designing solutions to big, global problems. DNAnexus is building a backend system to help researchers understand genomic data sets, making that reseaerch available to everybody, not just for Google — even though Google Inc has partnered with the company to host this huge, totally anonymized, government database.  The startup is a good example, the venture partners said, of the type of startup they’re looking to invest in, whereupon they listed a few more examples, including Climate Corp (weather insurance for farmers), and Adimab, an antibody discovery platform. For more on Google Ventures’ portfolio, check ’em out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, Rovio doesn’t need much of an introduction: It’s the company behind the now ubiquitous game that features everybody’s favorite affronted and chafed birds. Back in September, a whopping month and a half ago, Rovio’s North American General Manager Andrew Stalbow revealed some brand growth stats at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco, peeling back the curtain a bit. As a testament to how quickly Rovio is growing, thanks to Angry Birds, today at Web 2.0 Stalbow was back on stage, firing off some stats that give us a fresh glimpse into recent growth. At Disrupt, Stalbow said that Angry Birds had pulled in 350 million cumulative downloads across platforms (and was selling 1 million t-shirts and plush toys a month, god help us); and today, Angry Birds is already grown to 400 million cumulative downloads. Not bad for a month of angry squawking.  What’s more, Angry Birds Stalbow said that the game is currently seeing 130 million monthly users, 30 million daily active users, and 300 million minutes of game play each and every day. And perhaps what’s so impressive about these crazy growth numbers is that customer acquisition really hasn’t been aided by much marketing spend on Rovio’s behalf — at all. That’s right, to date, the total marketing budget is $0.  Yet, perhaps most importantly for Angry Birds fans — and as we’ve just seen, there are quite a few of those out there (including myself) — Stalbow confirmed today that there is in fact a new bird coming to the game for Halloween. Today, fans may have noticed that Rovio leaked this photo on their Facebook page, which immediately led to speculation over whether or not Rovio would be sling-shotting a new flapper into the game, and according to Stalbow, that’s exactly what’s going to happen. He did not give details, so we’re not sure what the bird will look like, what it’s ammunition will be (detachable beaks?), but judging by the photo, it looks like the avian bomber will be orange. At least in part. Oh, and an Angry Birds movie has also been confirmed, though there wasn’t really any doubt there, as the executive producer of Iron Man 2, Thor and Captain America, (and former Marvel Chairman) David Maisel, was hired onto the project back in June — and animated movie Rio dropped earlier this year. Yup, they’re serious. There’s also a cookbook, too, which Robin got a look at last week. For more, check out his post here. More to come as this story develops. Latest headlines delivered to you daily David Vladeck, The Director of the Bureau of Consumer Protection (a wing of the FTC), was appointed by the Chairman of the FTC, Jon Leibowitz, in April 2009. Today, Vladeck took the stage to speak in conjunction with Dr. Ann Cavoukian, The Information and Privacy Commissioner of Ontario, to talk about privacy and consumer protection in the digital age. Vladeck started out his portion of the talk this afternoon with a humorous analogy, saying that, for those unfamiliar with his job and what it is he does, he’s a bit like a gym teacher at the high school prom — with the high school prom in this case being the world wide internet. His job is to be a chaperone, or a regulator — as the case demands. Basically, to put it bluntly, he said:“I’m the guy you don’t want to meet … and frankly I don’t want to meet you either”.  Tongue in cheek though his comments may have been, the invasion of privacy is becoming a serious topic in Web 2.0 and 3.0, and will only continue to be a tricky subject — for both businesses and lawmakers — moving forward. And today, whether intentionally or not, many businesses are not exactly towing the line of legality, according to Vladeck.  So what’s the biggest problem facing privacy at the current juncture? Vladeck said that it’s become of seminal importance for businesses, from enterprise to startups, to build privacy protection into their business models and into their big data sets. Today, app developers and consumer web companies are eager to pull as much data on their customers as possible, but they need to be more sensitive to privacy and data concerns. According to Vladeck, many of these developers are overlooking protection specifically when it comes to children’s privacy. As more and more young people start using the Web, developers need to be aware that pulling geo-location data, email addresses, etc. of children is illegal, and that the FTC will be cracking down. Pulling data that can be identifiable to a specific child is unlawful and won’t be tolerated. “We see developers of apps aimed at children pulling down geolocation data and emails”, Vladeck said. “And the law forbids them from doing that”.  The profusion of apps that are indiscriminately pulling geo-location data and personal information today, he said, has become a huge problem, to which he then issued a warning to all app developers and business owners, saying, “If you don’t want to see us, don’t collect data you don’t need”. The privacy czar also touched, at least circuitously, on the proposed “do not track” bill (written by Ron Wyden, senator from Oregon) — which would essentially make it illegal to collect sensitive personal data without a warrant. Whether that pushes through remains to be seen, but to be sure the FTC and (at least a few) senators are keeping a close eye on how consumer information is being used and shared by web companies. “We’ve been very proactive in promoting giving consumers better control over their browsing habits”, Vladeck said, and companies like Apple, Google, Mozilla, Microsoft etc. (the companies that control the major market share of browsers) are taking the building of advanced controls into browsers and web search more seriously. As for entrepreneurs, the privacy honcho advised them to be transparent about what it is that they want to do with the data they’re collecting on their customers, specifically not to be collecting and housing data that they’re not certain what they’ll use for — even if they think it may become advantageous at some future point.  “Look at our public education materials”, Vladeck advised entrepreneurs. “Lawyers at the agency will be glad to answer your questions. We do help a lot of startups figure out how to tailor business models in a way that allows innovation, but keeps them on the right side of the law”. And that’s what it’s all about. Because, let’s be honest, you don’t want to be seeing David Vladeck any time soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, at the Web 2.0 Summit, Ben Horowitz, the former co-founder and CEO of Opsware and founding partner of well-known venture capital firm, Andreessen Horowitz, took to the stage today to speak to John Heilemann of New York Magazine. Horowitz spoke to his history with his founding partner as well as what the two tech veterans look for in the companies they invest in and mentor. Interestingly, at the end of the talk, Heilemann played a word association game with Horowitz, asking him what he thought about Facebook (among other big tech companies). Horowitz said frankly that he thought the social networking giant is the best run company in Silicon Valley — and the tech industry. When asked whether that was a product of CEO Mark Zuckerberg or the people around him, Horowitz said, of course, that he thought it was a product of both. “I pay a lot of attention young CEOs, and I think Mark is one of the best young CEOs in the business”. The reason for this? Zuckerberg is incredibly thoughtful about product strategy, Horowitz said.  He cited the example of how, when new hires arrive at Facebook, they are often forced to take lower titles than what they’re used to. Zuckerberg established this precedent because he wants people coming to Facebook not to be focused on their title, but instead on what kind of awesome products they’re going to build. He wants to make sure they’re at Facebook for the right reasons — not because the’ve seen The Social Network, for example. Zuck is extremely focused on the little things, Horowitz said, which is what will make him successful in the long run. And it’s this attention to detail, and staying focused on the long-term roadmap that has pushed the young CEO and the people installed around him, that has pushed them to have the same onboarding process for people at all levels of the company. “If you’re not interested in building products, you’re not going to play at Facebook”, the investor said. Horowitz’s words are slightly surprising in light of the heat that the young CEO has taken over the years for being an uncomfortable presence on stage, lacking in charisma, among other things. While Andreessen Horowitz hasn’t invested officially in Facebook, Marc Andreessen does sit on the board of directors. And since Horowitz admitted that he and Andreessen are “best friends” and like an “old married couple”, obviously the young company is something both investors are well familiar with. Horowitz also shared his thoughts on some other technology industry notables like Groupon and Zynga. He called Groupon “the fastest growing company in the world”, said that Twitter is “changing the world”, and was unable to say much more about Zynga (with its IPO looming) other than “I love it”. In relation to Steve Jobs, the investor said “it’s just so spectacular what he did in the world and with his life. I like how many people he proved wrong over and over again”. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Bill Gross was just on stage to officially introduce UberMedia’s latest product, Chime.in.  The app hit iTunes yesterday.  It is an online mobile social network built around interests. We’ve been seeing a lot of companies trying to tackle the interest graph lately, and Chime.in is the latest.  Chime.in does this by layering the interest graph on top of the social graph (the connections between people you know).  One way it does this is by applying a more finely tuned “selective follow” model.  “You can follow a part of person or a whole person,” explains Gross.  So if you only care about what I say about technology and startups, but could care less about the photos I post, you can only follow my startup stream.   In this way, Chime.in attempts to filter out a lot of the noise from your noisiest friends (hello, Scoble). Backstage, Gross also explained the difference to me between Chime.in and Google Circles (which lets you segment your friends and people you follow).  “Google Circles is filtering on the outbound,” says Gross, “this is filtering on the inbound.”  What he means by that is Chime/in doesn’t filter only by friends, but by the topics they post and share. Chime.in is designed so that people can share their thoughts, photos, videos, and links.  It could also turn into a marketing channel for entertainment brands.  Gross announced partnerships with E! Entertainment, Universal Pictures, Bravo TV and Disney from the start and an investment (in UberMedia) from Comcast. Here is where Chime’in’s revenue model comes into play.  Brands get to run ads on their Chime.in page, as well as in the mobile app.  These are like fan pages on Facebook, except that the brands themselves get to make money off the ads on that page.  “we let any brand make any rich profile page, we give them the real estate adjacent to it.  They want to be were the social activity is happening.”  Instead of simply giving links back to their own websites, brands can monetize their social streams as well.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Advise.me, the new and rapidly expanding startup accelerator and incubator, is working on its first startup. The company is still in stealth mode, and all we know about it is that it’s a social communication service of some sort, but definitely not another social network. It will, however, use existing social networks. And given the name and the landing page (chirping? mobile? the color blue?), our guess is that the new app has something to do with Twitter. What’s perhaps more interesting than speculating on the app itself, is looking at the team behind it and the process by which it’s being built. Although normally Advise.me will be working with companies that apply to its accelerator program, in this case, the team decided to pass some ideas around and build something on their own. I guess that’s just what happens when you get this many successful entrepreneurs to come together. Explains Advise.me CEO Solomon Engel, this is something that makes his group different from other programs out there. “Some folks on the team will act in an advisory capacity, others will act more operational and sometimes they could act as both,” he says. “So alongside working with companies that apply to our program, we’ll occasionally build something ourselves.”  Hence, Chirpr. Specifically, the Advise.me team members working on the Chirpr app incude Advise.me Co-Founder and CEO Engel, Chief Scientist at Proximic (and previously Founder of AltaVista and Co-Founder at Qwiki) Louis Monier, VP of Product at SimpleGeo Jeffrey Kalmikoff, GM and Head of Product at Plaxo Preston Smalley, Principal at Galpin Industries Tyler Galpin, Senior iOS Lead Developer at Apple Geppy Parziale and Senior Cocoa Architect at Apple Eva Diaz-Santana. The only non-Advise.me team member on Chirpr is CEO at Audiobox.fm Claudio Poli. Poli will serve as a lead engineer for Chirpr, while Apple’s Parziale and Diaz-Santana have the titles of Head of iOS Engineering and iOS Engineer, respectively. Galpin is Head of Design, Monier is the Data Scientist Advisor and Kalmikoff and Smalley are Product Advisors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Media company Clear Channel Radio and daily deals service LivingSocial are today announcing an agreement that names LivingSocial as the sole daily deal provider for over 500 Clear Channel-owned radio stations across 90 cities in the U.S. The agreement marks LivingSocial’s expansion from an online and mobile platform to one that now serves listeners, specifically the 80 million listeners per week that Clear Channel can provide. Throughout the day, local radio station personalities and DJ’s will describe the current LivingSocial deal to their audience, based on the market the station serves. The deal will also be posted to Clear Channel Radio station websites. In addition, the companies state that other LivingSocial offerings, including LivingSocial Escapes and Adventures (its travel and events arms, respectively), will be featured across other Clear Channel platforms. LivingSocial also offers family friendly activities via LivingSocial Families and time-limited LivingSocial Instant Deals. These too, will likely be spread via Clear Channel’s support, although there were no specifics as to where or how the various deals would be promoted. LivingSocial now has over 46 million members in over 603 daily deal markets. Clear Channel Radio, meanwhile, serves 237 million monthly listeners in 150 cities through 850 owned radio stations. Clear Channel content can be heard on virtually any platform, including AM/FM, HD digital radio, Sirius/XM and even online via its new venture iHeartRadio.com, a streaming radio service. iHeartRadio is also available in app format for iPad, iPhone, Android, Windows Phone and BlackBerry. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Dexetra, a mobile start-up, impressed us all last night with their Siri clone, an Android app called Iris. The folks there were so thankful that their project hit the front page that they sent us a kind thank you as well as a picture of a cake that the founders gave the team in celebration of getting TechCruched [sic]. It’s heartwarming to see people who worked hard get rewarded for their excellent work, especially when the reward is in the form of cake. The founders would also like to thank you, the community: The article was just awesome. Got a lot of encouragement and positive feedback from the community. Our team is also very excited and would like to thank you for the write up.Note: We are happy to post follow-up cakes in celebration of being TechCrunched, but let’s not make it a “thing.” Also, first person to comment “Slow news day?” gets cake. And banned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As we were reporting the news about Dropbox’s $250 million funding round, Forbes went live with a fascinating story, detailing how co-founders Arash Ferdowsi and Drew Houston turned down a “nine-digit” acquisition offer from Apple back in late 2009 when the company was only two years old. The late Steve Jobs, Apple’s iconic co-founder and former CEO, reportedly led the first (actually, only) meeting and apparently told Dropbox’s founders that they should sell because Apple would crush the company with a competing product  – the recently debuted iCloud service. From the Forbes article (and cover story), written by Victoria Barret: In December 2009 Jobs beckoned Houston (pronounced like the New York City street, not the Texas city) and his partner, Arash Ferdowsi, for a meeting at his Cupertino office. “I mean, Steve friggin’ Jobs,” remembers Houston, now 28. “How do you even prepare for that?” When Houston whipped out his laptop for a demo, Jobs, in his signature jeans and black turtleneck, coolly waved him away: “I know what you do.” What Houston does is Dropbox, the digital storage service that has surged to 50 million users, with another joining every second. Jobs presciently saw this sapling as a strategic asset for Apple. Houston cut Jobs’ pitch short: He was determined to build a big company, he said, and wasn’t selling, no matter the status of the bidder (Houston considered Jobs his hero) or the prospects of a nine-digit price (he and Ferdowsi drove to the meeting in a Zipcar Prius). Jobs smiled warmly as he told them he was going after their market. Read the full story here, it’s very much worth your time. (Image via Flickr user Images_of_Money, with permission) Latest headlines delivered to you daily We knew it was in the works, and now Dropbox has confirmed that it has raised a massive round of funding. The company has landed $250 million in Series B financing (bringing its total of capital raised to $257.2 million). Last we heard the round values Dropbox at $4 billion. Index Ventures led the round, with participation from a stellar list of new investors (Benchmark Capital, Goldman Sachs, Greylock Partners, Institutional Venture Partners, RIT Capital Partners and Valiant Capital Partners). Early backers Sequoia Capital, Accel Partners, and Hadi and Ali Partovi also participated in the round. Founded in 2007, Dropbox was initially jump-started at Y Combinator. Update: they reportedly turned down Apple, and Steve Jobs himself, who wanted to buy Dropbox for a ‘nine-digit’ sum, back in late 2009. Dropbox says it now has more than 45 million users saving one billion files every three days, and that it is poised to triple its user base this year. The fresh money will be used for acquisitions, strategic partnerships and the recruitment of new people, the company said in a statement. One of Dropbox’s main competitors, Box, also recently raised a monster round of financing, bringing its total capital raised to $162 million. Dropbox Raises $250 Million in Series B Funding More than 45 Million Users Saving One Billion Files Every Three Days Dropbox, a service that lets people bring their documents, photos and videos everywhere and share them easily, announced today that it has completed a $250 million Series B financing. The company will use the funds to accelerate its rapid growth, make acquisitions, pursue strategic partnerships, and grow the team. Dropbox has more than 45 million users saving one billion files every three days, and is on track to triple its user base in 2011. The financing was led by Index Ventures and includes participation from new investors Benchmark Capital, Goldman Sachs, Greylock Partners, Institutional Venture Partners, RIT Capital Partners, and Valiant Capital Partners. Early investors Sequoia Capital, Accel Partners, and Hadi and Ali Partovi also participated. Dropbox has received a total of $257.2 million in funding. “Our goal has always been to build a service that hundreds of millions of people would love and trust. We’re inspired by the consumers and businesses who depend on Dropbox, and we will continue to make sure that the world’s devices, services, and apps work together seamlessly,” said Drew Houston, co-founder and CEO of Dropbox. “We’re thrilled to have such world-class investors joining forces with us.” “We are delighted to have led this financing and believe Dropbox has the potential to become an iconic technology company,” said Danny Rimer, general partner at Index Ventures. “Over the past four years, Dropbox’s talented team has created a great service with a very strong business model, and we look forward to helping the company build upon this outstanding foundation.” About Dropbox The mission of Dropbox is to simplify life for people around the world. Dropbox lets people bring their docs, photos and videos everywhere and share them easily. The service has more than 45 million users in 175 countries saving one billion files every three days. Dropbox was founded in San Francisco in 2007 by Drew Houston and Arash Ferdowsi and has received a total of $257.2 million in funding. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Lookout, a company that offers security services for a number of smartphone platforms has long catered to the mobile security need of Android, Windows Phone 7 and BlackBerry users but has not offered an iOS app. After two years of development, Lookout is finally releasing a dedicated security application for iPhones and iPads via a new, free iOS app launching today. For background, Lookout’s web-based, cloud-connected applications for Android, Windows Mobile and BlackBerry phones help users from losing their phones and identifies and block threats on a consumer’s phone. Users simply download the software to a device, and it will act as a tracking application, data backup and a virus protector much like security software downloaded to a computer. Clearly the iPhone app was a missing piece of the puzzle for Lookout, especially considering that iPhone owners do more with their phones than anyone else, including browsing the web, sending emails, using social networks and even mobile banking. In fact, 52% of iPhone users conduct mobile banking on their iPhone. When designing the app, Lookout focused a single, easy to use app to keep iPhone users safe, and started by addressing the biggest risks to iPhone users today. For example, in a survey, Lookout found that 93% of iPhone users said they have concerns about the security of the data stored on their phones. And 4 out every 10 iPhone users are unsure about the security of public WiFi. Plus More than a third of users don’t regularly sync their devices. Basically the app secures your iPhone against all of these threats and more. With the missing device feature (which is the most popular feature on the Android app), you can use Lookout to help locate your lost or stolen phone on a map or sound a loud alarm to find it nearby. In terms of security, Lookout will walk you through the steps necessary to better protect your privacy and secure your iPhone. The app will actually notify you of settings or out of date software that could a phone’s privacy at risk, including letting you know if your iPhone is Jailbroken. Another feature alerts you when you connect to an unsecure WiFi network. And you can see which apps can access your location. Similar to Lookout’s other apps, the iOS app will back up your contacts and data on the iPhone and iPad. And with the addition of an iOS app, you can now manage a number of different devices, including your iPad, iPhone and even Android phone or tablet, from a dashboard on Lookout’s site. One feature noticeably missing from Lookout’s iOS app is malware protection. A few months ago, Lookout launched a new  mobile browsing application that will automatically check every website a user visits, from an app, email, or browser on a mobile phone, to prevent phishing sites from stealing personal data and malware from being installed on a device. But the company says that historically malware has not been a problem with iOS, so it didn’t make sense to include this functionality in the new app. Of course, iOS 5 also offers some of these security features as well, including software updates and more. But Lookout says that the action users take of ‘not updating now’ and saving updates for later is the biggest threat to mobile security. Lookout is now 12 million users strong, and is now adding 1 million users a month. And Lookout’s app is actually powered by Lookout’s Mobile Threat Network, which constantly analyzes global threat data to identify and quickly block new threats with over-the-air app updates. Threat detection that would have taken days now happens in minutes; effectively protecting users before they even know a threat exists. The Mobile Threat Network is powered by a dataset of over 700,000 mobile applications that grows daily as more applications are added to app stores around the world. On average more than 1000 apps are added to the Mobile Threat Network daily. There’s no doubt that with the addition of iOS Lookout’s userbase will growth significantly. And don’t be surprised if the company released a premium offering as well. Lookout just raised $40 million in new funding from Andreessen Horowitz, Khosla Ventures, Accel Partners and Index Ventures. John Hering, CEO and co-founder of Lookout, told us at the time of the funding that Lookout is ‘orders of magnitude bigger than’ its competitors including Symantec, and McAfee. His goal is to hit 100 million users soon, and certainly with a new iOS app, this could become a reality in 2012. · Latest headlines delivered to you daily Big news for ‘Big Data’ company Clustrix today. Clustrix, which was initially financed by Y Combinator back in 2006 and went on to raise $12 million in funding from Sequoia Capital, USVP and ATA Ventures, has gotten to a point where it apparently has enough klout to convince a former top Hewlett-packard (HP) executive to join the venture as its new leader. Clustrix this morning announced that it has appointed Robin Purohit as president and CEO.  At HP, Purohit was a vice president and general manager of the company’s $3 billion portfolio of IT management, information management, and application security products.  Purohit has more than 20 acquisitions under his belt, too, and has been an executive leader for these three major exits: CANSTAR Communications to HP (1994), VERITAS to Symantec (2005) and Mercury to HP (2007).  Purohit will succeed Clustrix co-founder Paul Mikesell, who will stay on as VP of Strategy and Technology. Based in San Francisco with offices in Seattle and London, Clustrix has developed a database appliance that solves database scalability challenges for the ‘newSQL’ market. You can learn more about its product here and here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Word-of-mouth is the tried and true way to spread the word about your business, news, or product updates. For businesses, allowing your customers to tell their friends about how awesome your product or service is can be a great way to increase your brand recognition and attract new customers to come in and check out what you’re doing. As Basecamp wrote back in September, the web-based project management system has grown increasingly in popularity because customers have been able to tell their friends and colleagues about it and bring them over to the service. Curebit, an alum of the Y Combinator winter class of 2011, launched at demo day back in March as a way for online stores to increase revenue through referrals by turning existing customers into marketers. Curebit wants to optimize referral systems for eCommerce platforms, and today they’re launching a new product to help do that more effectively. It’s called the “Social Referral Optimizer” and Curebit Co-founder and CEO Allan Grant tells us that his product is essentially like Google Web Optimizer for referral systems: It solves the hard problem of getting high conversion rates from referral systems. Curebit supports the type of split referral incentivization that has worked so well for companies like Dropbox. For those unfamiliar, this split referral system is when you recommend Dropbox to a friend, and when they sign up, both you and your friend get some kind of reward, be it 5GB of storage for free or a shiny nickel. According to Grant, Dropbox worked at optimizing their referral system for months before it began to have any real sort of effect on customer acquisition and conversion, so Curebit wants to take this optimization (i.e. pain in the butt) out of the process for any site — even yours. What the Curebit team came to understand as they tested different form of referral optimization is that conversion depends a great deal on the details of the offer (the language the offer is presented in, the type of incentive, etc.), so their Social Referral Optimizer allows sites to automatically break an offer into its various permutations and test them across Curebit’s partner sites to see which has the highest conversion rate. The startup’s optimizer enables sites to vary the amount of the discount, the offer text, the message one uses to share it with friends (whether that be via Facebook or Twitter), the landing page, as well as the graphic design of each page. But really the coolest part is the cross-site optimization: For sites that don’t have enough volume to get those statistically significant results, users are able to take advantage of Curebit’s software, which learns as it tests from other sites across the Web (about 700 of these are already available for testing). Interestingly, from the data the startup has collected so far, they’ve learned that the conversion rate depends not so much on the amount of the discount that one offers friends for their referrals, but more on the text one uses — how the entire offer is expressed. And so far, the results have been encouraging. With Curebit’s optimizations, users are able to get 30 to 60 percent of of the customers that buy to share exclusive offers with their friends, resulting in a direct, measurable life in sales of up to 15 percent.  The startup is also launching an additional two new features today, including “Facebook Sponsored Stories” integration, which is designed to optimized shared messages, turning them into high-conversion social ads, as well as “Social Influencer Tracking”, in which Curebit identifies customers that have shared an offer (and are super influencers) so that merchants can personally thank them.  For example, when Gina Bianchini, co-founder of Ning, shared one of Curebit’s offers, the DODOcase founders got an email about it right away and were able to reach out to say thanks immediately thereafter. Next time the Ning co-founder buys something that uses a Curebit referral, the DODOcase guys will know right away, even if she doesn’t share. Pretty cool. For more on Curebit, check out the video below:   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in July, Erick took a trip to a hotel suite in Manhattan to get a demo of BuddyTV’s new iPhone app. You can check it out here. For those unfamiliar, BuddyTV’s iPhone and Android apps turn your smartphones into a smart viewing guide and a remote control with enhanced social features like chat and the ability to broadcast what you’re watching to Facebook and Twitter. At the time, the app was working exclusively with Google TVs, but today BuddyTV is announcing that it has landed another big fish: AT&T.  Beginning today, all AT&T U-verse users can directly control their receivers with the BuddyTV Guide. Using their iPhone, iPod Touch, or iPad, subscribers can use the smart channel guide to display only the channels that they want to watch. As you “heart and rate shows and channels, the app gives you recommendations based on your personal preferences and what the app thinks users want to watch. And, just like Netflix, the recommendations get smarter the more you “favorite” and the more you watch. (Speaking of Netflix, the app also integrates with Netflix Instant for users who subscribe to the streaming video service.) Thus, users can create favorite channels to create a personalized TV listings view that displays only those channels that users watch most often (including HD channels), as well as allowing users to set up reminders and receive push notifications so that they’ll never miss another episode of America’s Funniest Home Videos.  For AT&T U-verse users and avid smartphone users, this is an awesome bonus, as it is essentially turning your iPhone into a master TV remote that learns the more you use it. The BuddyTV Guide app is free to download and is available now in the App Store. Native Android and Google TV versions are coming soon. For more, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A tipster informs us that UberMedia, the company behind social networking apps like Echofon and UberSocial / Twidroyd, has unintentionally pushed its new iPhone application onto the App Store (iTunes link). This is plausible, because the Chime.in website isn’t accessible yet at the time of writing, although the support pages appear to be live already. So is Chime.in the oft-rumored challenger to Twitter, which UberMedia has had run-ins with in the past? UberMedia has always denied that it had plans to launch a competing social network, so it’s a question worth asking. And the answer is no, not really. Chime.in is described on the support pages as an online and mobile network organized around interests, or an ‘interest network’ to keep it brief. Still according to the support pages, Chime.in was “was created for people who are active in social media and looking for a way to engage in conversations and more deeply interact with content related to their interests”. Basically, it lets people build and maintain communities around their favorite topics. When you first launch the app, you can actually create an account using either a Facebook or a Twitter profile. That’s where things get interesting (pun intended): Chime.in’s technology also identifies users who Chime about topics you’re interested in and recommends them, as well. Chime.in’s search function lets you search by person, interest and community so you can choose how you want to engage around a topic you care about. You can also follow interests, people or a person’s specific interests to make it as streamlined as possible to digest content and engage with other users. Updates on Chime.in, dubbed Chimes, are rich media-enabled, so you can include photos, videos, polls or links and users can view them directly from your stream. Posts can also be broadcast across other social platforms (Facebook, Google+ and Twitter) or saved for users to read later. At launch, everything you do within Chime.in is public, although the company says on its support pages that it intends to “start layering in more privacy controls” in the future. I’ve also found a page that clearly shows applications for Android and Blackberry are also in the works (see screenshot below). As for the question whether Chime.in competes with other social networks; they try to answer that question themselves, too: How is Chime.in different from existing social networks? All other social networks are all about connecting with people. Chime.in is about connecting with interests and people – it’s an interest network. It lets you tailor the content you see and search for to the topics you care about, so you aren’t bogged down sorting through posts you aren’t interested in. Chime.in is also designed to create a richer social experience by integrating multimedia and making it easy join interest-based communities and to engage in real-time conversation. Why would someone use Chime.in instead of dominant social networks like Facebook and Twitter? – One of the great things about social media is that you’re free to use any platform you want. Chime.in was created to address the need for relevance in social media. As such, it wasn’t designed to replace any networks, but to enhance the social media experience with a platform tailored to a clear, specific need. Given that we allow people to publish Chimes to Facebook, Twitter and Google+, we fully expect not to replace other networks, but to be additive to the ecosystem. Sounds like they listened to Twitter attentively. You should be able to give the free app a whirl now if you have an iPhone (iOS 4.0 or later required). UberMedia was founded in early 2010 as TweetUp (later PostUp) by serial Internet entrepreneur Bill Gross. The company has raised close to $27 million to date.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social learning startup Grockit raised its fourth round of funding, a $7 million series D, with current investor Atlas Ventures leading the round.  Existing investors Benchmark and Integral Capital also participated, with new investors the NewSchools Venture Fund (an education fund backed by John Doerr and Reid Hoffman) and GSV Capital CEO Michael Moe.  The round is much less than the $33 million education startup Knewton just raised, and in fact is the same amount as Grockit’s series C funding in May, 2010 was also $7 million Grockit is building out a set of online social learning services.  It began with test prep for the SAT, GMAT, and LSAT, then moved onto high school AP classes.  It’s latest service is Grockit Answers, a site that creates a Q&A page for any videos on YouTube.  Here is one on the credit crisis.  The videos get chaptered based on the point at which each question is raised or answered, and the community can supply their own answers.  “Anyone ca ask a question or answer,” exlpains Nivi, “and pin it to that point in the video.” Grockit itself has collected 3,700 educational videos on its YouTube channel, which founder Farb Nivi claims is more than Khan Academy. Grockit is all about students, teachers, and tutors aswering each other’s questions online.  About a week ago, Grockit passed its 10 millionth answered question, and the number of chat messages going across the site is approaching 100 million.  Out of its 1 million total registered users, about 25,000 to 50,000 are active in any given month, which suggests that most students use it to prepare for a test and then move on.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Toronto-based photography community 500px, the Flickr alternative which recently raised $525,000 in Series A, is now available on the iPad in app format. The new app includes all the feeds you would find on the site, including the feeds for Popular, Editor’s Choice, Upcoming and Fresh photos, plus access to your own photos and those belonging to your friends, the ability to like, favorite and comment on photos and much more. According to 500px’s Creative Director, Evgeny Tchebotarev, the community has grown 20 times over the past 12 months, and now serves 54 million pageviews and sees 6.6 million visits per month. The iPad app is the first step at reaching a larger global audience through additional platforms, he says. Plans for iPhone and Android versions are also in the works. The new app was built using the two-month old  500px API, which is already in use by a few third-party applications, including ISO 500, PhotoStacker for 500px, and 500px Land. In addition to the above-mentioned features, the app also offers sharing options for Tumblr, Facebook, Twitter and email, the ability to view full-sized or maximized photos, landscape and portrait modes, safe browsing to filter out nude photos and support for slideshows. Future releases will add support for account creation (including registration via Facebook), photo descriptions and EXIF data support, the ability to move a photo while zoomed in, advanced image caching, uploads from iPad and offline support. Although open to anyone, 500px is designed more with the needs of professional photographers in mind, and has attracted a growing community of Flickr switchers. The focus with 500px is on ease of use, design and tools that appeal directly to those who make a living from their photos, like the ability to create your own portfolio and blog, and the ability to sell your photos online. For those interested in the new 500px iPad app, you can download it here from iTunes.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch readers may be familiar with Uber, the on-demand cab/private car service that lets users bypass the annoying process of waiting for cabs or expensive prospect of renting a limo — all via your mobile device and SMS. Today, a car service is launching a new feature in New York City that it hopes will ride on the growing popularity of Uber as well as on-demand mobile reservation and food delivery services like OpenTable or Seamless to make getting a private car even easier. (Because apparently nobody likes ordering over the phone anymore.) GroundLink, the New York City-based car service that was founded in 2003 as an aggregator and solutions provider to the ground travel industry, is going mobile today to enable users to book a private car whenever they want — either immediately or at a scheduled time — via their smartphone on iOS and Android. With its new on-demand mobile functionality, GroundLink aims to offer an attractive alternative to other metro car and cab services by offering full transparency into price before a user books their ride, as opposed to getting hit with a daunting bill once the ride is finished. GroundLink wants to take hidden fees and long waits out of the equation (a big problem for anyone who’s tried using similar services in NYC), and hike up the transparency by offering flat rates solely based on distance rather than competitors which include traffic (via measuring speed) in their pricing schemes, often resulting in sharp price hikes thanks to fun things like gridlock and toll traffic. Is there really any time in transit to or from New York City (or San Francisco for that matter) where one doesn’t have to deal with traffic?  The flat rate prices for hiring a private car via GroundLink are pretty competitive; for hiring a car to New York city airports, for example, the service is currently offering rides for $49, Boston for $60, and San Francisco at $59. Though, of course, these rates do not include waiting time, stops, tolls, and parking, etc., but, compared to yellow cabs, considering you’ll have your own car and won’t have to deal with some cabby’s oppressive B.O., this is a pretty good deal. (Check out more on the service’s prices here.) What’s more, according to GroundLink CEO, Charlie Fraas, the service has “ten times more cars in their NYC fleet” than other competitors offering this on-demand mobile functionality seeing as it’s already an established name in NYC. And, as availability is generally the top concern when booking a car on-demand via mobile, GroundLink offers a great value proposition seeing as it’s already available in 5,000 cities and 110 countries around the globe. The service already has its own well-stocked fleet (of 300 dedicated cars) and will also take advantage of affiliates (over 45,000 transportation providers worldwide) as well to make sure there’s a car available when a user needs one. Depending on where one lives, GroundLink can have a car there in 30 minutes. If you live in the middle of the tundra, though, expect it to take more like 12 hours. (They’re not magicians, people.) Registered GroundLink users can take advantage of its mobile, location-based “Ride Now” function to order cars in realtime (on-demand) via GroundLink’s apps, or book in advance with “Ride Later”, which lets one set a specific date, time, and location for pickup. In each case (like Uber), riders can track their car’s location (in conjunction with its exact arrival time) and communicate directly with drivers at any point during the process. This feature is launching today in New York City, and depending on results, will launch worldwide sometime in the near future. The mobile service also offers a social sharing tool so that riders can update friends and followers during the duration of their trip, and leave reviews and recommendations for good drivers and not-so-good drivers. To celebrate the launch of “Ride Now” in NYC, GroundLink is offering customers who book through ots iPhone or Android apps the chance to win more than $15,000 in cash and other prizes. Starting today, GroundLink’s fleet will be stacked with a variety of prizes for five days, including two envelopes containing $1,000 in cash each day. Other prizes include tickets to Yankees, Giants, and Jets games, Momofuku and Peter Luger gift cards, Brooklyn Bowl, Barneys and Tiffany gift cards, etc. “GroundLink is much more than an app”, said the GroundLink CEO. “We are the first company to deliver access to a global fleet of more than a hundred thousand cars through an app. Until now, business travelers had no way to find a reliable and competitively priced private car service around the country and the globe. With the launch of our mobile apps on iPhone and Android, we’re embracing a multi-platform business model that is unique in our industry”, he said. For more on GroundLink, check them out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Polycom, provider of telepresence, video and voice solutions, this morning announced that it has acquired ViVu, a privately- held video collaboration software company. The deal was signed last Friday, for undisclosed cash consideration, and Polycom expects the transaction to be neutral to earnings.  ViVu raised $3 million from Inventus Capital Partners, DFJ and Quest Venture Partners back in October 2009, followed by a strategic investement by chip maker AMD last June. ViVu has developed software that can be embedded into Web applications such as enterprise, social, and vertical industry applications to enable instant web-based HD video collaboration.  Founded in 2008, the company currently has offices in Cupertino, California and Bangalore, India, and employs about 25 people. Clients include TIBCO and Thomson Reuters. Here’s how Polycom pitches the acquisition of the company: ViVu gives Polycom a fast-track to embed HD video into web-based applications through an OEM model, accelerating time-to-market and adoption of Polycom HD video collaboration solutions, and driving awareness of the Polycom brand powering video collaboration inside a wide range of applications. Polycom will leverage ViVu technology in its RealPresence Platform, a software infrastructure suite for video collaboration. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SohoOS is on a tear. Users are growing at a rate of 30% month-over-month, just recently shooting past 400,000. And soon, the company will make a hard bet on a brand-new design — a complete revamp — aimed at singeing it into the backbone of the small businesses it serves. Some background: SohoOS offers small businesses a utility suite of applications, for example, invoicing, CRM, and inventory management. The startup, which I’ve been following since its debut, closed a $1.75 million financing round led by Mangrove back in January.  I recently had another chance to sit down with the company, with the revamp being the core of our conversation. It’s a bold bet that is based on insights from the hundreds of thousands of small and micro businesses the company has on-board. What the SohoOS found out is that small businesses are used to services (think QuickBooks, FreshBooks, InvoiceMachine etc.) that market a particular value proposition, that being, efficient accounting. The premise is that the heart and soul of a small business is its accounting activities. Except SohoOS found that small businesses don’t see it that way at all, and for two main reasons: First, actual accountants are still very much in the picture. This means that the services such as the ones noted above aren’t a substitute, they’re more like data collection silos. Second, small businesses don’t see ‘accounting’ as the heart and soul of their businesses management activities. Rather, it’s the ‘contact’ they view as the heart and soul. Don’t mistake this as a subtle difference, it’s a holistic difference, and is the one that SohoOS is betting the entire revamp on. Eran Manor, lead designer at SohoOS walked me through the new design (see screenshots below) where every action is centered around the concept of the contact in question. As Manor put it, they reverse engineered an iPad app to create the new UX for the web application. Sure enough, everything is 1-2 clicks away. The screenshots below aren’t final, but paint a very clear picture of the ‘contact in the center’ approach being bet upon. The new design will be rolled out to all users in the over the next two months.  One other aspect I’ve always like about SohoOS is that unlike the conventional wisdom, of ‘do one thing and do it well,” the company is focusing on several services that are key to the daily management of a small business. These are: invoicing, billing features, CRM, inventory & project management.  The thinking here is that providing these things to a sufficient depth allows SohoOS to appeal to a larger userbase. With the US, UK, and the EU constituting 54% of the userbase, this is a smart move.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Airbnb, the hot online room (and sublet) reservation startup, this morning announced that it has teamed up with business incubator Springstar to define a strategy for international expansion, confirming rumors that kept the German tech blogosphere busy the past weekend. Springstar was founded in 2007 by German entrepreneurs and angel investors Klaus Hommels and Oliver Jung, and Harish Bahl, who leads the incubator’s operations in India and Asia Pacific.  Springstar in a press statement said it will be providing strategic guidance in the expansion of Airbnb’s international operations in select markets around the world, but did not specify which markets. It already provides such guidance to a number of companies scattered all over the world, including Russia’s KupiVIP, Turkey’s Markafoni and Brazil’s Brandsclub. Airbnb competes internationally with the likes of Wimdu, 9flats.com, Crashpadder, iStopOver and CouchSurfing, with new competitors springing up almost daily. The company recently established its first European office in Hamburg after acquiring a German clone called Accoleo. Expect to see a couple more deals like that in the coming months. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Brenden Mulligan is an entrepreneur who created Onesheet, ArtistData, MorningPics, and PhotoPile. He’s an mentor for 500 Startups, Advise.me and several startups. You can find him on Twitter at @bmull and blogging at Starting Up. There has been a reoccurring theme on my mind recently as I’ve advised startups on areas of focus. It revolves around the goal of reducing friction. Reduced friction in a product leads to less user frustration, high conversion, and overall user happiness. I’d like to use a few examples to illustrate what I mean. Taxis / Uber Let’s start with Uber, the startup that lets you order a black car from your mobile phone in San Francisco, New York, Seattle, Chicago, and a growing list of cities. Because I know the team, I’ve been following this startup since they launched. I actually took an Uber car to celebrate selling my first startup during one of their first weeks in beta. When I first heard about the service, I focused on the luxury aspect of traveling in a black town car with a private driver. Who wouldn’t? It’s in their tagline (“Everyone’s Private Driver”) and it sounds awesome. But after my first Uber experience, I found out that while nice, the luxury component is strangely unimportant compared to their much bigger function of reducing the friction of getting a ride somewhere. Let me elaborate. Friction points are italicized. Here is generally what you need to do to get a cab: Here is the Uber experience: Uber has reduced all the friction. What was a tedious process before is a seamless, pleasurable interaction. The most important thing Uber provides its users is that frictionless experience. The fact that it’s a black car means it’s generally an aesthetically nicer experience (and with SF Taxis, that can make a big difference), but that’s a small detail compared to the other benefits of using the service. Zipcar / Getaround A lot of people are familiar with Zipcar. It’s pretty simple. There are a bunch of Zipcar-owned cars around the city that members can rent on an hourly basis. All reservations are done through their website. Getaround is a new startup taking on Zipcar by altering the model. Instead of Getaround purchasing a lot of inventory (cars), they built a marketplace for car-owners to list their own vehicles for other people to rent. I love the idea, and so do thousands of car owners looking to make money from their unused cars. The company won best startup at TechCrunch Disrupt in NYC and since then has been well funded. I have used the service frequently. I love what they’re doing and think they’re going to build a great company. However, they face a serious challenge. Zipcar owns its inventory, so they have more control of the friction in the experience: There isn’t really a lot of friction there. Now let’s look at that experience with Getaround: Wow. That’s a lot more friction. Again, I love Getaround, and their team is more aware of these issues than anyone. I’m 100% confident that as they go, they’ll iron this stuff out, just as Zipcar ironed out all the challenges they faced at the beginning. The friction issues Getaround faces are a result of the fact that Zipcar bought cars, while Getaround buys bandwidth. This initial disadvantage will make the company much more nimble and scalable long term. I think the key to reducing friction quickly is to incentivizing the car owners to reduce the friction points. Give owners the option to guarantee their schedule, so cars can be booked immediately. Push them to install the CarKit, (the device that lets the renter locate and unlock the car from their smartphone). Then, when owners do these things, Getaround should give them a bigger percentage of the rental fee or prioritize those cars in search results. These owner will get more rentals and make more money. Over time, as users choose these cars, other owners will need to add these options to compete in the marketplace, and friction starts to disappear. Airbnb / Kayak Even successful startups still work every day on reducing friction. Let’s quickly compare Kayak and Airbnb. Kayak: Airbnb: A lot of times, finding an Airbnb accommodation is a bigger hassle than a booking hotel. But they’ve managed to build a $1 billion company, and continually works to make the process seamless and frictionless. And it’s getting better and better. So what does all this mean? Friction is important to consider when creating a product. If your users feel friction using or signing up for your service, you have a problem. Sometimes it’s unavoidable, but you should do everything in your power to remove as much friction as possible. And you should pay attention to this constantly as your product and service grow. When you examine your product, where are the friction points? Are you letting users sign up with Twitter/Facebook, or do they need to register separately? Are you opening popups to get their attention instead of letting them continue on the site? Are you requiring information you don’t need? Reduce friction, increase happiness. Excerpt image courtesy of Ian Hampton Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post was written by Len Jordan, who is a venture partner at Madrona Venture Group and currently holds board seats at companies like Cedexis, MaxPoint Interactive, Zapd, Control4, DSIQ, Medio and Wetpaint. Whenever I invest in a new company, I send the CEO my customary email with advice on how to work with his or her new board. I’ve spent 24 years in the software industry—including holding operating roles at three early-stage software companies and board seats at 12 startups—so I thought my “Top 10” list on the care and feeding of board members might be helpful to other CEOs and executive as well. So, without further ado, here it is: 1. Have a plan, and get your entire company and board to understand and support it. A company’s business plan and strategy is the map of where we are going. The plan almost certainly will change, but the best CEOs keep everyone informed about where we said we are going, where we are currently going, and why we changed plans if we did. The plan should not be that complicated. Too many business plans use multisyllabic adjectives and adverbs—the plan should be simple even if the products are complicated. The essence of the business plan should be simple enough for a six year-old to read and understand. We should agree on a plan that describes our target customer; the company’s product; and competition. This plan informs the product roadmap (including timeline and hiring requirements, such as how many people you need to build, market and sell the product) and P&L (revenue, expense and net income) broken out by month and quarter and by R&D, sales and marketing and general-and-administrative expenses. The sales and marketing plan goes with this, including a product and pricing model. The preference is to approve the above and then stay out of the CEO’s way—the opportunitycost of your time is incredibly high. 2. Tell us if the plan changes for “small reasons”. Most plans change for tactical reasons — e.g., the product is earlier/later than expected. Or customers are adopting/buying earlier/later than planned. I like a process in which, if the plan shifts, the CEO pre-emptively throttles the investment/spending without being asked. For example: tell us what level of business progress/metrics (e.g. downloads, installs, usage, trials, bookings, contracts closed, etc.) you want to see to feel good about spending to the plan (or below it if necessary), even if we are not yet certain about exceeding revenue during the current period. Conversely, what level of progress above plan would make you want to invest more aggressively and what key investments (products, sales and marketing hires) would you make? Having the entire plan and contingencies agreed to ahead of time makes it a lot easier for you to do your job and for us to stay out of the way. Plans don’t have to be perfect, and they change, especially at startups. 3. Tell us if the plan is changing a lot for “big reasons”. Sometimes plans need to change for strategic reasons. The best CEOs are continually testing and retesting their basic hypothesis. Is there still a fundamental problem we are solving, or market opportunity we are addressing? Are we still pursuing the right product? Are we selling to the right customers? Are the ways we are selling and marketing right for the market and product? Are we as competitive as we thought? Is our team as good as we had hoped? Being a CEO is hard because you need to have conviction and commitment to a specific strategy, but you need to continuously challenge the assumptions underpinning it without whipsawing your team, customers and board. The best CEOs stay on-strategy, but are very deliberate when making strategic changes. 4. Strategy mistakes are harder to admit than execution mistakes. It’s hard to admit when a strategy is flawed. It’s very easy, on the other hand, to decide that the market, customer and product thesis is correct but sales-and-marketing execution is weak. I’ve seen too many companies delay making a tough strategy choice by first trying to fix the flaw through a change in execution. If execution is flawed, fix it, but look beneath the veneer to make sure the substance underneath is sound. 5. The average of two strategies is usually not a strategy. Whether you have a board or not, you have to commit to a cohesive strategy. In tennis you can play at the net or the baseline, and both can be great strategies, depending on the circumstances. The average of the two — playing in the middle of the court (commonly referred to as ‘no- man’s-land’) — is the worst place to play and is never a good strategy. Too many startups split the difference: They continue with the old strategy, add a new strategy (like a new product), under-resource both and fail at each. Good strategy starts this way: Assess the company’s essential attributes—market, team, product, customers, competition–and develop a simple one page SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats) analysis. Frame alternatives, discuss tradeoffs with the board and make hard choices. The classic startup mistakes often consist of giving up on the right strategy too early, choosing the wrong new strategy, assuming the old strategy provides more benefit to the new strategy than it does or choosing, instead, to focus on both an old and new strategy out of fear of making the wrong choice. It is scary to have both feet and hands off the rock at the same time. 6. Email is good for delivering straightforward information; board meetings are good for explaining complicated information and discussing alternatives. I love short (above the fold) weekly email updates from CEOs on key progress points (product development, hiring, revenue, key partnerships, etc.), but it’s OK if they are less frequent (coming every other week, or once a month). But bad news should travel fast—this includes losing a key customer, a key engineer quitting, etc. The road has bumps; I’d rather know about it when it happens than after it leads to some other issue (like a product delay or a revenue miss). Also, I’d prefer that problems/opportunities not only get communicated, but that options be developed to address the problem or opportunity. Frame the situation and assess the pros and cons of a few choices—it makes it easier to help come up with a reasonable solution. 7. Board meetings are not pitches. You have our money, so let’s figure out what to do withit. The best way to earn trust from your board is not to tell us what’s going well; it’s to tell us what’s not going well. Better yet, make everything run well but tell us the things you want to focus on that could become problems if not addressed. If you do #6 , the board meetings can be less about updating the board and more about discussing key strategic choices/decisions and ways we can better tune our execution. A basic review of financials, customer progress, product development, partnerships, hiring, etc. would be great, but we’d also like you to expose key strategy elements (SWOT) and get us to discuss and react. Receiving board decks two days ahead of time means we can add more value in the board meeting. Also: The best companies can get the board deck down to 10-15 slides, max, especially if #6 is happening. Allocate time for strategic topics at key board meetings and from time to time, invite an outside/expert that can challenge the group at key strategic inflection points. Finally, as with any meeting, don’t unveil controversial topics at board meetings for the first time. Give people a heads up ahead of time so they discuss the topic at an average blood pressure. 8. Ask for help — we work for you. Really. We like helping recruit employees and partners (customers). Put us to work, let us brag about you to potential employees and provide context and support. We can assist with strategy questions. You should know more about the business than we do, but our distance can provide perspective. And perhaps we have seen patterns that can be applied from other experiences. This can be incredibly valuable as long as we don’t over or mis-apply the patterns in the wrong instances based on the wrong attributes. We are OK if you seldom call and are also OK if you call every day when we are working on something that requires it. We do appreciate just getting a check-in call from time to time. A little like calling your mom in college, sort of. If you only call to ask for money she will know something is up. 9. Involve your exec team with the board. It’s good practice to have at least one board member interview all exec hires; different perspectives can be good. Having the exec team in the board meetings can be great, especially if they present the area of their responsibility (product development, sales, marketing, finance). That said, it’s also important to have a closed session of the board that is just the board plus counsel, to discuss board-only matters. 10. Tell us how we are doing. We hope to add value but will make mistakes and can often manage things better. Tell us about these areas and we will try to get better. We will do the same with you. And tell us when we should stay out of the way — you run the company, and sometimes the best thing we can do to help is let you do that. The average early stage company takes nine to 10 years before it will exit. So we likely are going to work together a long time. Let’s make it productive, rewarding and fun. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I think it’s a fair assumption to say that, for app developers, the enjoyable part of their job is building the actual app, not finding the right web services and hosting provider, setting up databases, and slogging through configuration. I could be wrong to presume this to be true, but CloudMine, a Philadelphia-based startup launching in open beta today is willing to bet that most developers might agree with me. So, CloudMine has developed a service that will allow developers to reduce the pain by providing a set of RESTful APIs that allow them to quickly create back-end solutions for their apps. Specifically, the startup is offering schema-free data structure storage, user account creation and management, and server-side business logic for computations that are too complex or data-intensive to run on a mobile device. CloudMine is currently part of the current batch of fledgling startups in DreamIt Ventures’ Philadelphia-based accelerator program, which has invested $20K of seed funding in CloudMine’s backend  solution. The service has been in closed beta for several months, where its testers have reported that CloudMine has cut the time it takes for developers to configure backend solutions in half.  Developers can use the service’s REST-based API directly or download its SDKs for the platform of their choice to give app creators the chance to increase their value proposition by focusing on the product (and getting it in front of users) and not worrying about tinkering with servers, web apps, or scaling.  I like that the PaaS service is offering a “B2D” (business-to-developer) solution that enables developers to move their focus away from infrastructure to product testing and iterating. It’s also pretty cool that developers can sign up for free and immediately get an API key for their first app — and quickly generating keys for other apps with one click once they’re ready to do so.  As to who is behind the startup: CloudMine was co-founded by Ilya Braude (formerly of Eastern Research acquired by Sycamore Networks and Drakontas), Marc Weil (who has previously worked at Apple and Oracle), and Brendan McCorkle (also the co-founder of Textaurant.  For more, check out CloudMine at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Do you remember when photojournalism and photographic stories used to be a more central part of the news reading experience? Granted, those were the days when print publishing reigned supreme and photo-centric news magazines represented some of the highest circulation periodicals in American publishing. There’s no better example of this than Life Magazine, which sold 13.5 million copies per week at its peak.  Yet, Life’s print edition slowly sputtered out of existence over the years (finally closing the doors of its print operations in 2007 after a number of re-starts), and just as digital technology has forced publishers and media organizations to alter their approach to the distribution and monetization of their content, photojournalism, too, seems in desperate need of a shot in the arm. Photography and photo-sharing have exploded in popularity thanks to the cameras on our smartphones and the countless photo apps and tools that make storing, displaying, and sharing our photos a breeze. While online photo albums and slideshows have become ubiquitous, quality photojournalism and photo stories that actually present a narrative (and even share news) just haven’t made the jump. Once Magazine, a startup that officially launched its first issue on the App Store in August, is looking to breathe new life into photojournalism by offering a series of curated photo stories uniquely edited and designed specifically for the iPad. Working with professional photographers and writers to create complete stories that aren’t just aggregated clumps of photos from the Web (no slideshows here), Once wants to reach all those people that love photographic stories, whether they consider themselves professionals or casual Instagram users. It’s Life Magazine for the tablet age. (For sake of full disclosure, I should say that I have known the founders and editors at Once for several years, and consider them close friends. While I have no personal financial stake in the magazine, I do admit a bias insofar as I hope they achieve fame and glory. Though, admittedly, this can be said for all the startups I cover.)  While print publishing and photojournalism may be going the way of the dinosaur, every day, people upload millions of images to their Facebook and Flickr galleries, Path and Instagram, and the growing demand for engaging and sharable photographic content presented in a non-snooze-worthy narrative is still alive and kicking. (Just ask Tracks.)  Yet, as iPad owners currently resort to viewing photo galleries and stories in Safari and photographers remain fixed to print publications where photo budgets are drying up at light speed, Once is hoping to take advantage of the new availability of sales data and the shifting consumption habits of readers on the Web to offer a new solution. In an industry where contributors struggle to make money from their digital content, and publications likewise fight tooth-and-nail to monetize, Once is hoping to offer a compensation (and revenue) model that can address both of these pain points. For starters, the magazine initially launched for free on the App Store, but today the team has released its new paid version, which means that its issues are now available both as in-app purchases or via a discounted monthly subscription. (The cost of which is $2.99 per issue or $1.99 per month with recurring billing, respectively.)   To entice photographers, Once will be splitting  all revenue from App Store sales right down the middle (after Apple takes its 30 percent cut, of course). As it stands now, the magazine is advertising free, but moving forward, Once will slowly incorporate ads and will also look to begin selling physical prints of popular photos through the App Store. Although Once has only been live for just over a month, the startup’s unique model has already added Dave Eggers (the award-winning author, co-writer of the screenplay for Where the Wild Things Are, and founder of McSweeney’s and 826 Valencia) as well as Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer Vincent Laforet to its advisory board. What’s more, Pulitzer Prize-winning photographers like Craig Walker, who contributed work to a private beta, continue to line up to participate in the Once experiment. The reason for this seems largely due to the fact that the magazine has been designed specifically for the iPad. From the beginning, that’s been the focus — unlike the trajectory of the majority of publications, which start with a print product and then grumpily port their offline content to digital media and app stores. The hope is that starting from scratch will allow Once to bypass the baggage inherent in legacy print models and give them a leg up on the competition.  As to the content of the magazine, generally speaking, each issue of Once will include three feature stories, each of which will be introduced by a multiple-page-long essay. Each feature will include an average of 20 to 25 photographs, which are complemented by captions, audio clips, and interactive graphics.  Thanks to the high resolution of the iPad 2’s display (1024-by-768-pixel resolution at 132 pixels per inch, for those keeping track) the experience of flipping through these photo-essays on the iPad is more enjoyable than reading a magazine in print. The interface is intuitive, easy-to-use, and provides just enough supplemental bells and whistles without distracting from the star of the show: The mind-blowing photos.  Of course, the one problem with being an iPad-focused magazine is that Once doesn’t have the benefit of drawing from a ready-made readership. While the team doesn’t have to worry about the costs (and overhead) traditionally associated with print publishing, user acquisition will no doubt be the startup’s biggest hurdle going forward. To combat this, friend and Once Founder Jackson Solway tells me that the team is considering various ways to partner with existing publications, potentially offering teaser versions of their stories to high-traffic websites in exchange for prominent links back to the Once app.   What’s more, with Apple prominently featuring Newsstand on all iOS 5-enabled devices, this will likely become a terrific source of downloads and eyeballs not only for Once, but for all publishers.  As Mark Edmiston, CEO of Nomad Editions, (which has a similar sharing model to Once, albeit with smaller rev-sharing percentages for contributors), recently told Johnny Biggs, publications that have previously found their app-only titles lost among the barrage of lifestyle apps and passed over by readers, Newsstand allows them to place their content front and center, which he believes will be a boon for publishers going forward. As the Once team is composed of those who’ve previously worked at Wired, Getty Images, McSweeney’s, and Mother Jones, there’s plenty of publishing experience to go around, but with a 50:50 rev-sharing model, and prices set at levels that won’t scare away potential readers, the startup is going to have to sell a lot of issues to stay afloat. To aid in the quest for profitability, the team raised a small seed round back in March and is currently actively pursuing a larger second round of financing.  With a beautifully designed app that features some amazing photography from notable photojournalists, the Once experiment is already off to a good start, but the big question is: Can the startup’s rev-share model prove to be more lucrative for photographers and editors than current industry practices — are they tapping into the future of photojournalism? Or is this just another false start? Weigh in and let us know what you think. And check out Once in the App Store here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just in time to be one of the first app installs on my freshly arrived iPhone 4S, there comes a new location-based mobile app called Roamz (iTunes link), which will have its official debut on Monday at the Web 2.0 Summit in San Francisco. As hinted at by the name, the app wants to help you discover the world around you as you “roam” around town. To do so, Roamz digs into social signals from services like Facebook, Foursquare, Twitter and Instagram in order to find out what people in your area are buzzing about right now. It then presents those results to you in a stream which you can filter by interest. After installing the app, you can optionally choose to connect Roamz Facebook, Twitter and Foursquare, so it can provide better, more personalized recommendations. It looks at your own social signals, like your check-ins, your friends’ check-ins, and your shared likes and interests, including those you indicate within the app itself using the included thumbs up and thumbs down buttons provided on the listings. Then, on the main screen, there is a series of toggles that let you filter what sort of information you’ll see, broken down into “interests” like Shopping, Events & Entertainment, Restaurants, Children, Pets and much more. By switching these toggles off or on, you can better filter the results of the activity trending near your location. The result, ideally, is that you don’t have to be constantly checking your social networks to find out what’s going on, what’s popular or where your friends are checking into right now. “There’s so much social data being shared,” explains Roamz CEO and Founder Jonathan Barouch, “but if you’re not following the right people at the right time, you may be missing out.” Barouch admits that the venue categorization is not complete for all areas yet – only major metro regions. That’s why, for example, the results for somewhere like San Francisco or New York appear to be much better filtered than those I’m seeing for my own city (sunny Tampa, Florida). For smaller areas like this, only about 50% of the venues have been categorized. But, like they say, you’ve got to launch sometime. In the future, Roamz plans to deliver its recommendations through iOS5’s new push notifications and may even integrate with Siri (e.g. “Siri, does Roamz recommend any museums around here?”) Further down the road, brands may be able to tap into these push notifications to send out highly personalized messages to users, which I like to imagine would go something like this: “Welcome back to Starbucks, Sarah. Enjoy this coupon for $0.25 off that latte you’re about to order.” But then again, maybe I’ve just been hanging out with Siri too much today. Still, serendipitous discovery of the world around you? That’s the app I was waiting for. Roamz is in the very early stages of development, so it can’t fully deliver on that promise just yet. But it’s certainly one to watch. Australian-based Roamz raised $3.5 million in Series A financing in January 2010 from media company Salmat. Barouch himself was previously the founder of Fastflowers.com.au, one of Australia’s largest floral chains.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Software company PlugShare, makers of apps for owners of electric cars, is today announcing a partnership with car-sharing service (and TechCrunch Disrupt NYC winner) Getaround to provide $50 to those PlugShare members who sign up to share their car via Getaround’s service. The idea, whose launch has been timed in conjunction with the first-ever “National Plug In Day,” is meant to promote peer-to-peer sharing, thought to play a crucial role in expanding EV adoption and infrastructure. National Plug In Day (Sunday, Oct. 16, 2011) is an awareness-raising effort taking place across over two dozen cities across the U.S., with the hopes of drawing attention to the environmental and economic benefits of plug-in electric vehicles. Plug In America, the Sierra Club and the Electric Auto Association will be teaming up to offer plug-in parades, tailgate parties, test drives and more. PlugShare’s founders will be at the local San Francisco celebration of National Plug In Day this Sunday from 11:30 AM – 2:30 PM at Chrissy Field, advocating for EV adoption alongside leaders from Getaround and Plug In Day sponsors. Due to Getaround’s current availability, the $50 financial incentive will only be available to residents in the San Francisco Bay Area and the San Diego metropolitan area. PlugShare is also announcing the launch of its new Web application, which now joins the iPhone and Android apps as another tool for accessing the large list of public and private charging stations the company maintains. You can preview the Web app here at www.plugshare.com/widget.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Here’s an interesting piece of news that’s sure to reignite debate over consumers’ rights in the digital age: A Boston-based startup called ReDigi has this week launched an eMarketplace that allows users to resell their digital music — as well as buy new and used songs for cheap. (This latter feature will be turned on in the next few weeks.)   While the idea of a secondary resale marketplace for digital content no doubt sounds appealing, given the tumultuous (and lawsuit-heavy) history of the sale and distribution of music on the Web, there are a number of tricky legal issues in play. Namely, with the rise in the digital distribution of music, movies, software, and more, there has come surfeit legal confusion over whether or not the so-called “first sale doctrine” applies to digital transactions.  Basically, under the first-sale doctrine, once the person who owns the rights to, say, a CD sells a copy of that work, the owner relinquishes control of that individual copy. Once that copy is in a new user’s hands, they own it and can do with it as they please, including reselling, lending, or giving it away. However, Some have claimed that the first-sale doctrine does not apply to digital downloads, for instance, when that digital property has been licensed to the buyer, rather than explicitly sold. In the case of Vernor Vs. Autodesk, the software corporation sued Timothy Vernor (an online software reseller) for reselling its software on eBay, saying that, under the terms of use, the software had been licensed to him, not sold; thus, they claimed that he did not own the right to the software and could not lawfully resell their product.  In 2008, the Washington District Court sided with Vernor, ruling that the software was in fact sold, upholding Vernor’s right to resale. However, that decision was subsequently overturned in September 2010 by the 9th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. Which was followed on October 4th of this year by the Supreme Court’s decision to decline hearing the case, allowing the Court of Appeals’ verdict to stand — a decision which can obviously have significant (negative) implications for sites like ReDigi, consumers, and beyond. Obviously, there are conflicting precedents for the first-sale doctrine in our evolving digital landscape, and these questions of ownership and right to resale tend to descend into gray areas and legal quagmires that often result in the sputtering and collapsing of those companies attempting to create legal secondary markets for resale. Of course, ReDigi is not naive to the context here and claims that it has done its due diligence with a number of law firms in Boston, New York, and LA, and has in fact created a marketplace that both protects the rights of the consumer as well as conforms with current laws and supports the wishes of the music industry. Though achieving the latter certainly has to be akin to pulling a rabbit out of a hat. ReDigi hopes to succeed where others have failed by designing a marketplace that is not about file sharing, but is instead a method of “facilitating the legal transfer of music between two parties”. Really, the key here is that the startup’s technology is able to actually verify that a track was properly purchased (or acquired) by the person looking to resell, and manages items posted for sale within the sellers’ music libraries to prevent multiple copies from being auctioned. (Which should, in practice, protect the seller from copyright infringement.) The other feature that works in ReDigi’s favor is that, once the digital transaction has been completed, the track is thereby deleted from the seller’s music library as well as any mobile devices that are synced with their music player. The copies of songs that are on sale are held by ReDigi up until the transfer takes place; once the song is purchased, the actual track as well as the license are then transferred to the new owner, whereupon all copies of the track on the seller’s account are deleted.   As ReDigi is a completely free service with no subscription, installation, initiation, or upgrade fees — and users get free private cloud storage so that they can buy (this feature is coming soon), sell, or listen to their music anytime anywhere — this will no doubt have great appeal to consumers. Plus, ReDigi already has a catalog of over 11 million songs. After all, how many of us have accumulated years worth of MP3s and digital songs that we no longer listen to? I know that I, for one, have several GBs of music that I would gladly resell and not bat an eyelash when ReDigi deletes those songs from my players and devices. This is probably why ReDigi was able to attract 120,000 social network followers pre-launch and is in the process of closing a $1.5 million round of funding from a host of angel investors. On the other hand, the startup claims that users will be able to buy pre-owned digital music from resellers “at a fraction of the price currently available on iTunes”, which is sure to raise the eyebrows of both Apple, music labels, and copyright owners. ReDigi certainly has a lot going for it, as the process of reselling music is fairly simple. All one has to do is download the free “ReDigi Music Manager”, drag songs for resale from their music library (iTunes, Windows Media Player, etc.), and drop them onto the ReDigi icon located on their desktop. With a verification engine in place to determine that the seller is actually an authentic license holder, and the ability to delete sold copies from the seller’s devices, this may work towards mollifying the concerns of the music industry. But, again, one notices the use of “license holder”, which thanks to the muddied perspective of the law, may still put ReDigi in danger if the powers that be decide to call their lawyers. While ReDigi’s investors — and the team that has been working on this solution for the last few years — have clearly thought long and hard about this problem, having designed the marketplace to address the legal concerns of the music industry (as well as to pay out a sizable chunk of the proceeds from sales and resales to artists and labels), it would be surprising if we don’t hear ReDigi’s name along with the word “lawsuit” sometime in the future. For more, check out ReDigi at home here, and please weigh in to let us know what you think. Does ReDigi have a shot at transforming the resale of digital content — or are they destined for a legal morass?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile advertising startup AppRedeem has just launched App Trailers, a new product that rewards you for viewing videos about mobile apps. The service, available here from the iTunes App Store, doesn’t use the same model as typical incentivized install programs do today. Instead, users are given points for watching a trailer, then are provided with the option to download the app at the end of the video. Only if a users taps “yes” is the advertiser charged. Says AppReedem, these types of installs will be more valuable to the advertiser because the user is indicating that they actually want to install and try that app. Users get the same number of points whether or not they choose to installs, so they’re really only downloading apps they’re interested in – there’s no bonus for tapping “yes.”  Each video listed in the app is worth 10 points, but users can get 25 points for registering their email or inviting friends to try the service. Rewards include a $1 Amazon gift card (100 points), a $5 REI gift card (500 points), $10 gift cards from Crate&Barrel, Fandango or Macy’s (1,000 points) and $25 gift cards from Nike, Nordstrom or Pottery Barn (2,500 points). Given how long it would take you to accumulate enough points to earn the top-level rewards, it’s clear this app is best suited to those who have a lot of free time on your hands. (Perhaps those without an Angry Bird addiction?) That said, App Trailers is certainly a unique take on driving app installs in an increasingly overcrowded app marketplace. And who know? You might even discover a new app to try when the service ramps up a bit. Currently, there are videos for a number of popular apps, including Priceline, Groupon, LivingSocial, SkyGrid, PingMe, Blendr and others. The only problem? Apparently you don’t get any points for having all those apps already installed on your phone. Bummer. You can try App Trailers for yourself from here. AppReedem raised $700,000 from SV Angel and Blue Run Ventures in June. It also has an AppReedem-branded app on Android here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Wave Accounting Inc. has just closed $5 million in financing, in a Series A round led by Charles River Ventures, with the participation of OMERS Ventures. The financing will be used by the company to continue the development of its free online accounting software for small businesses and market it internationally. Wave is a completely free (not freemium, but free) accounting package that supports itself through offers. When a user is logged into their Wave account, there’s a section called “Business Savings.” This screen features offers for business-related needs like business cards, web hosting, credit card processing services and more. American Express, Dell and Grand & Toy are among several dozen advertising partners to date. The online app offers double-entry accounting, financial dashboards, invoicing tools, expense tracking and a suite of reports, but it can also be used by those who don’t need or want full accounting reporting. The setup process is easy, too – Wave imports data from your bank accounts, credit cards, etc., so there’s no manual entry involved to get started. It then continues to automatically import transactions from a user’s bank account or electronic statement going forward. Wave is now used by 75,000 small businesses in 198 countries around the world since its launch less than 11 months ago. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At the Web 2.0 Expo in New York City this week, Yottaa, the startup that specializes in offering cloud-based web performance monitoring and analytics services, announced that it is now officially expanding into the speed optimization game as well, offering websites a quick and easy way to accelerate their websites. Yottaa is bringing its so-called “Site Speed Optimizer” out of beta to bring a relatively low-cost nitrous boost to the websites of SMBs.  Co-founded by chairman of Nexaweb, Coach Wei, the startup launched in September 2010 with its “Website Monitor” to enable SMBs to assess, benchmark, and monitor the performance of their websites. Shortly thereafter, Yottaa raised a $4 million series A round from General Catalyst and Stata Venture Partners. Since then, the startup has attracted over 60,000 businesses to its free products (like its Website Monitor).  But, to become a full-service web optimization tool for startups and small businesses, offering speed enhancement technology is a must for the startup to compete with fast-growing competitors like the awesome TC Disrupt finalist CloudFlare. Consider, too, that Amazon calculated that 100 milliseconds lost in site speed cost businesses 1 percent of their total revenues — and that Google found 500 milliseconds of delay to result in a 20 percent drop in traffic. Considering 400 milliseconds is about the speed of the blink of an eye, these seemingly small numbers can have a big effect. Since more than 90 percent of the time it takes a site to load comes from simply displaying the site’s code, in other words its front end, streamlining the way in which a site manifests its HTML, JavaScript, and cascading style sheets (CSS) code becomes extremely important — especially when milliseconds matter. While eliminating the stuff that’s not integral to delivering the user-facing content quickly to the browser is at the core of speed optimization, today it’s really only enterprises and big businesses that can afford to do the work it takes to make this a reality. Sites like Google may apply hundreds of techniques to decrease calls made to the browser to make its front end load faster, but SMBs generally can’t afford to hire the sizable team of engineers that this kind of optimization requires.   With its Site Speed Optimizer, Yottaa hopes to make this a reality by offering a cloud-based service that takes advantage of servers planted across the world to work as a proxy for the source website and make optimizations happen in realtime. The speed enhancing technology works towards not only caching content, but improving the rate of display of the actual content itself. So, beyond condensing the time a website’s code takes to be delivered, Yottaa is also using techniques that target the user’s individual browser, browser version, and device to help speed up the rate at which the content is rendered in the user’s particular browser. (Like using SPDY for Chrome users, for example.) Browser optimization: It’s the little things that make the difference. As Lydia Leong, the Research VP at Garnter said in a statement, combining content optimization, edge caching, and network optimization is crucial to offering enhanced speed and performance to websites. “Next-generation content delivery networks have begun to combine all three types of optimization into a single service”, she said. “And a cloud-based approach to delivering such services can make them accessible to businesses that have not previously been able to afford a CDN or have not found a CDN to be cost-effective”. Thus, for SMBs, being able to take advantage of Yottaa’s elastic multi-cloud network (and patent-pending cloud routing technology) that optimizes web pages in realtime using more than 100 methods (a la Google) is pretty neat, especially when the startup’s “Site Speed Optimizer” can be accessed in a free trial or by way of monthly service fees that start at $29.  For more, check out Yottaa’s Site Speed Optimizer here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In May, a startup named Tracks debuted at TechCrunch Disrupt NYC offering a photo sharing app that enables users to turn their images into stories. As MG wrote in our profile of Tracks at the time, Tracks offers a similar photo cluster experience to Color’s first app (which has since fizzled out) — except “it’s much, much easier to understand”. From pub crawls to family vacations, Tracks allows users to create photo albums on-the-go with the friends that are with them, who, by the way, have to be invited into the group. These on-the-fly albums are called “tracks”, which appear both in the app and on the Web and allow users to watch the path of their “track” in map view as it unfolds. Tracks also offers physical photo books (like Postagram and Keepsy) to create an all-in-one photo solution that meshes together both online and real world photo viewing experiences.  The startup was off to a good start, but today the team is building out the Tracks experience in conjunction with the launch of iOS 5, launching an updated version of their iPhone app that, according to Tracks CEO Vic Singh “showcases the power of the experience graph”. As “tracks” themselves are really micro-social networks based on real world experiences, the startup is taking advantage of iOS 5’s new features to give its users a richer mobile experience.  Tracks users will now be able to filter their images automatically in realtime, stream their “tracks” to iOS 5 connected devices via Airplay, get news and updates through a feed that shows activity across users’ tracks and networks, and take advantage of photo origin data that will geo-tag uploaded pictures with the location in which the photo was taken — all shown on Tracks’ interactive map. What’s more, users can now click a link through SMS or email and be taken directly to the track on the Web or their mobile device, or share entire tracks with non-users over email.  Other features of Tracks’ new iPhone app include a new dashboard which allows users to see a quick view of each track and its members all in one place, slideshow viewing, in-line commenting, and enhanced address book integration.  While Facebook and Instagram both let their users view photos uploaded to their respective photo repositories, the real difference here is that Tracks wants to allow people to tell a story with their photos, rather than just display a random, static album or stream of images. They’ve kept Facebook and Twitter integration out of the picture, too, because the team wants the Tracks experience to remain more private, where sharing happens between the people who were involved in the events the photos capture.  And with the app’s updated look and feel, allowing users to share via text, comment on tracks, write captions, and share over Airplay definitely adds to the context of these photo-stories and gives the app a more robust user experience. Plus, sharing (within its Path-like limited networks) now works far better and will no doubt entice users into further interaction. For more on Tracks’ updates, check it out on the app store here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Contributor Ryan Spoon is a Principal at Polaris Venture Partners and focuses on investments in internet, technology and digital media. Thanks in part to the Wall Street Journal’s “Web Startups Face Cash Crunch“, much has been made about the state of early stage investments and investing. While there is debate as to whether the article is accurate and/or overstated, let’s look at how we arrived here: 1.  Pace of innovation. It is unlike anything we’ve seen before. This is happening because today is a better time to launch a company than ever before: technology, speed, cost, and capital all support the trend. The continued maturation of the internet, the cloud and the emergence of mobile platforms have changed everything involved in building product, targeting users and engaging customers. It has changed the fundamental operating and time constructs behind building compelling businesses. As a result “entrepreneurship is in vogue”, using Fred Wilson’s words. 2.  Capital. Over the past few years, it has flowed quickly into early stage technology – and it’s come from all directions: 3. Cascades. As more money flows into the seed stage, it affects the investments. Most obviously: more financings get done.Less obviously: the financings look different. There are more early stage investors and those investors want to put more money to work…and invariably the deal economics shift. Entrepreneurs have a desired dilution amount and investors have a desired ownership amount —those move in relative concert. For instance, those rates are the same for a $500,000 round on a $2.5m pre-money valuation as they are for a $1m raise on a $5m pre. Furthermore, it affects the deal structure. The majority of today’s seed deals are done on convertible notes—in part because it is often a more efficient way to raise a round and in part because the investor makeup looks different: a slew of great investors perhaps, but no true lead(s). These ‘headless seed’ rounds—without a lead investor to help support and shepherd the raise process alongside the founding team—can make downstream Series A fundraising challenging for those other than the rocket ship startups. 4. Cash Crunch.  The “cash crunch” for a company comes when it is time to raise the subsequent round. There has been a surge of seed-funded companies, many financed at strong valuations and by a wide network of investors; consequently, the burden is on the company to differentiate itself, show meaningful progress and grow into a subsequent funding in-part influenced by the initial round (capital and valuation). Great companies won’t struggle here, but the reality is that there is a limited number of firms who can write these size checks and a limited number of companies that can support those valuations. Hence the “crunch”. So what does this mean? Some simple advice I’d offer early stage founders: Two questions I always ask seed companies: “What will success look like at the end of the seed phase?” “When do you know it’s time to raise your A round?” If you have a great handle on those questions, the rest will fall into place. Image credit: Shutterstock/ Lasse Kristensen Latest headlines delivered to you daily Onepager, the startup that allows any user or small business owner to quickly build a website (for free), is announcing today that it has raised $350K in seed financing from a host of New York City-based angel investors, like Daniel Eskapa and Mark Birch to continue development of new features (i.e. embedding feeds and videos) and support its marketing efforts. Onepager was founded by Matt Shampine, the very same entrepreneur behind Simande, a full-service web design agency, We Are NY Tech, a website that profiles entrepreneurs (and was lauded by Fred Wilson), as well as WeWork Labs, the co-working space that plays home to a mixture of creatives, developers, and early stage startups. But what is it that Onepager does, you ask? The concept is very simple indeed, Onepager’s design template enables users to build their own website in a jiffy: Users just enter in the text, images, videos and links they want to appear on the site — as one would in a Word doc — and hit publish. As Onepager is a reseller for Opensrs, the startup takes care of setting its users up with domain names, which can be searched for, purchased, and synced all from the platform. And the platform provides hosting as well. Onepager is completely free to use, or visitors can pay $8 a month for their own customized domain with a full suite of analytics to see who’s clicking, as well as a newsletter generator.   Squarespace and Moonfruit are other startups in the space that provide similar functionality, but in allowing its users to embed their social data, add buttons that connect to Facebook and Twitter pages, add images, a logo, forward your domain right from the page — and Onepager works automatically on mobile, as it’s all compatible with HTML standards. (Unlike Moonfruit which uses Flash.) Onepager has been designed to be an uncomplicated solution to quickly building a workable website; users don’t have to know diddly about HTML coding, which means it’s great for local restaurants and small businesses that want to create a web presence but can’t afford to pay web designers a boatload of cash.  The site will also soon be offering embedding from embed.ly to allow site owners to supe up their multimedia offerings and news feeds. So, if you want to convince your friends you’re a great web designer without having to read Coding For Dummies, Onepager is the site for you. It’s cheap, easy, and you can build a great website in 10 minutes. Check Onepager out at home here and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInWhat Does The iOS Newsstand Mean For Content Providers? Nomad Editions Gives Us Some AnswersThe iOS Newsstand may be annoying to some but to publishers it’s a dream come true. They can place their magazines front and center, ensuring eyeballs on their content and display ads without much fuss. I talked to Mark Edmiston, CEO of Nomad Editions, about their new Newsstand-compatible titles (including Good Dog, an iPad magazine that I presume is about cats) and how placement on the newsstand can make or break an app. Nomad Editions found that many of their “app-only” titles were lost in the morass of lifestyle apps and were passed over by readers. By placing them front and center, Edmiston believes the numbers can only improve. He’ll get back to us in a week or so with the verdict, but here’s a quick video interview with him about the move. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ask any developer working in this space, and they’ll tell you that accurate grocery product information is hard to find via an API. To help solve this problem, the team from shopping list creator AisleFinder have launched Supermarket API, an open source API for the grocery industry. The new API contains product details on over 150,000 grocery items as well as aisle info for over 2,400 supermarkets in the U.S. Currently, the API provides access to supermarket aisle info from Whole Foods, Trader Joes, Safeway, CostCo and Wal-Mart in the U.S. and promises additional data for stores in Canada and Europe soon. In terms of product listings, the API offers descriptions, photos, categories and aisle numbers for over 150,000 grocery items. And because it’s open source, the team promises there will always be a free version of Supermarket API to use. It should be noted that Supermarket API isn’t the first product info service to attempt to solve the difficulties surrounding accessing grocery data info through programmatic means. In August, mobile app makers Pushpins, Inc. launched SimpleUPC, which contains data on over 120,000 food, beverage, personal care and household goods from over 15,000 brands and nearly 5,000 manufacturers. The difference is that SimpleUPC does not contain aisle information, while Supermarket API does. It’s also designed more for use with UPC and barcode scanner apps, than with shopping list or aisle navigation apps. Supermarket API is still in the early stages of development, but if you’re in need of a service like this, head over to www.supermarketapi.com for more info. Latest headlines delivered to you daily ThingLink, a startup that lets you add rich media tags to online images, is today announcing the launch of an internal incubator called ThingLink Labs which will be a dedicated environment to create and productize innovations in the field of image interaction. The Labs’ first project is Rich Media Notes, a printed version of ThingLink images, which will also include NFC tags. The new Notes, built-in collaboration with designer Klaus Haapaniemi, are being shown off today and tomorrow at the Wired 2011 conference in London. Delegates will receive their own Rich Media Notes, which, when read by an NFC-enabled smartphone, will link through to an online profile on About.me. In case you’re unfamiliar with ThingLink, the company lets you add tags to online images that show up as small blue dots when you move your mouse over the image. The dots can link to URLs, include text, or link to a number of services, including  Amazon, iTunes, YouTube, EventBrite, Facebook, Twitter, Vimeo, Flickr, SoundCloud, Spotify, Wikipedia, Etsy and more. These hotspot-laden images have been popular so far with indie record labels, big-name bands and promoters, including, for example, music artist promoter TopSpin. There are a couple of big deals with labels in the works, too. Some artists use ThingLink images that allow users to play tracks directly from the photo itself, while others link out to the artist’s social networking presence elsewhere on the Web. By turning these ThingLink images into printouts, there is the possibility of wider distribution with NFC-enabled posters, flyers, handouts, and other material. Record labels may even use them in the future to create interactive physical album covers, to bring back that sense of engagement that used to come from perusing a CD or record’s liner notes. Rich Media Notes have been created in collaboration with UPM RFID, providers of NFC tags, and TagAge, providers of NFC printing solutions. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This is a guest post by Mark Suster (@msuster), a 2x entrepreneur, now VC at GRP Partners. Read more about Suster at his Startup Blog, BothSidesoftheTable. Everybody knows that when you raise money at a startup your ownership percentage of the company goes down. The goal is to have the value of the startup go up by enough that you own a smaller percentage of a much larger business and therefore your total personal value goes up. The simplest way to think about this is: If you own 20% of a $2 million company your stake is worth $400,000. If you raise a new round of venture capital (say $2.5 million at a $7.5 million pre-money valuation, which is a $10 million post-money) you get diluted by 25% (2.5m / 10m). So you own 15% of the new company but that 15% is now worth $1.5 million or a gain of $1.1 million. But understanding how you’re likely to get diluted over time is a more difficult concept. And figuring out how much your equity may be worth over the course of a 5-year stint at a startup is even more complicated. I’ve had to simplify a bit, but to make it easier to understand I’ve teamed up with Jess Bachman at Visual.ly. If you want to see a view of the power of their work check out this Steve Jobs infographic. I’m a huge believer in Infographics and the ability to create deeper understanding of complicated topics through visual means. As “Big Data” becomes more pervasive the power to visualize will become increasingly important. And Jess is awesome at his trade. His personal blog with some great example is here. So here is our crack at explaining the world of dilution to you. Let us know what you think. And if you want more goodness like this don’t forget to sign up to my newsletter and to follow Jess on Twitter. We’ll bring you some more goodness again. Let us know what topics you want us to break down for ya.  Listen, understanding the world of valuations and how equity gets split on a sale is a whole lot more complicated than the graphic depicts. I hope it gave you a flavor. If you want a deeper dive I shot some video on calculating ownership and dilution over time. And make sure to read VentureHacks. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Marketplace for business expertise Gerson Lehrman Group (GLG) has partnered with and acquired a minority stake in Ushi, a China-based business social networking service provider.  GLG’s investment, which was part of a recent $3 million funding round, brings Ushi’s total of capital raised to $4.5 million. Earlier backers of Ushi also participated in the financing round, which is the Shanghai-based company’s second to date. Those earlier investors include Milestone Capital founding partner Yunli Lou, Endeavor co-founder Peter Kellner and Jose Cheng, managing director of Li & Fung private equity. Based in Shanghai, Ushi offers a social networking service that caters to Chinese businesspersons and entrepreneurs, with a member base that the company says includes over 40,000 CEO-level and 10,000 CTO-level exes and key individuals from over 85 percent of the country’s VC and PE firms. The investment and partnership with GLG make sense on a strategic level. In China, GLG boasts a network of more than 25,000 subject matter experts who can be engaged real-time and on-demand to assist in deal sourcing, research, due diligence, etc.  Ushi members will be invited to join the GLG marketplace to expand the company’s expert network in China. GLG will advise Ushi on the commercial development of Ushi.com and Ushi Answers. The latter is a new, invitation-only collaborative Q&A service recently launched to a select group of Ushi members. Think Quora for business topics, evidently focused on China. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In a blog post, Union Square Ventures‘ Brad Burnham just announced that the firm has invested in DuckDuckGo, a startup building a nifty search engine with less clutter and more privacy. Scott Banister, Jim Young, Jeff Miller, Joshua Schachter, Kal Vepuri, Joshua Stylman and Peter Hershberg also invested in the round, writes founder and CEO Gabriel Weinberg. USV Managing Partner Burnham will be joining the fledgling company’s board. He writes: The company is young and under staffed so there are definitely holes Gabriel hopes to fill, but his observation that “traditional algorithmic signals are not the only authority on the web,” and his clever use of real authorities to curate search results makes Duck Duck Go an interesting alternative to your everyday brand. It’s unclear how much USV invested in the company, but we’re digging for more info. From Weinberg’s blog post on the fundraising: My original plan was to delay raising capital until I saw a compelling reason to do so, perhaps forever. For better or worse, I stuck to that plan, which ended up being about a 3.5yr delay. So why now? At the end of last year I noticed that the search engine started to really click with a greater percentage of people in a way that it hadn’t before. Don’t get me wrong — we still have a long way to go to reach our vision — but it was obvious that some things were really starting to become compelling, e.g. our Zero-click Info, privacy policy and goodies.  And here’s how DuckDuckGo is growing, according to its internal stats.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily TwinStrata, which offers cloud-based data storage, backup and disaster recovery solutions, this morning announced that it has secured $8 million in a Series B round of funding led by Avalon Ventures. The company will use the fresh capital to ramp up sales and marketing efforts for its CloudArray solution. TwinStrata’s CloudArray cloud storage gateway connects customers’ applications and backup infrastructure to the cloud, enabling them to store, and recover data instantly to any location.  CloudArray supports public and private cloud storage providers like Amazon, RackSpace, OpenStack, EMC Atmos, Nirvanix and Scality, among others.  The new funding brings the company’s total of capital raised to roughly $14.5 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Citrix Systems has acquired ShareFile, a cloud storage, file sharing and collaboration solutions provider, the companies announced this morning.  ShareFile enables businesses to securely store, sync and share business documents and files, both inside and outside the company, across multiple devices.  The financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. ShareFile CEO, Jesse Lipson, will become VP and General Manager of the newly-formed Data Sharing product group at Citrix, which will be responsible for the ShareFile product line. The move is in keeping with Citrix’s vision of a so-called “personal cloud” – a collection of files, apps and personal data unique to every person and accessible from any location and device.  ShareFile competed with the likes of Dropbox and Box.net, but was more focused on selling its offerings to IT departments within organizations of all sizes, rather than consumers and small businesses. Other alternatives include Egnyte, Nomadesk, Mozy and Syncplicity. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today sees the formal launch of Lemon, a free cloud-based receipt organizer and spending tracker for Android and iOS devices (Blackberry and Windows Phone versions ‘coming soon’). The service lets users store and organize email and paper receipts in the cloud to help them keep track of purchases, eliminate clutter and start spending smarter. To upload paper receipts, people can download a mobile app and simply snap a picture of the receipt. Lemon will subsequently digitize and store the data. Digital receipts – from any retailer, the fledgling company claims – can be sent directly to one’s Lemon account (which comes with a personal @lemon.com email address). Someone please alert AOL! Lemon goes beyond merely storing data, though: Lemon squeezes out all the juicy details [receipts] contain to help you stay organized, see where your money goes and save some cash along the way. Lemon extracts data from each receipt down to the product-level detail to generate insightful reports andgraphs that illustrate spending trends, make it easy to prepare for tax time or submit expense reports. Over time, Lemon will also offer users targeted discounts and promotions from relevant brands and retailers based on their spending habits, giving users access to exclusive deals, future discounts on products they purchase often and personalized offers from their favorite brands. Lemon was co-founded by co-CEO Wenceslao Casares, serial entrepreneur (Bling Nation, MECK, Wanako Games) and angel investor (Qik, IndexTank, MyGengo). The company has already secured $10 million+ in funding from Lightspeed and Balderton Capital. Lemon soft-launched at the most recent TechCrunch Disrupt conference’s startup alley. For similar services, check out Shoeboxed, MyReceipts, Expensify and KEEBO.   UPDATE 2/12: Lemon.com informs us that the $10M+ was for their previous company, Bling Nation. Lemon is currently bootstrapped. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Pinkdingo, a young startup looking to breathe new life into the charity space, is announcing today that it has raised $1.4 million in seed funding from a host of angels, including John Paul DeJoria, the Founder of Patrón Spirits and Paul Mitchell Systems as well as Sunil Sani, an New York-based angel and member of the board of trustees at Save the Children. The startup has also recruited several other advisors who are well-familiar with the fundraising space, among them is Mark Sutton, Founder of Firstgiving, one of the largest P2P social fundraising platforms and Founder of General Assembly, Brad Hargrreaves.  So, what is it about this private beta startup that’s drawn some big seed funding from these fundraising veterans? For starters, Pinkdingo Founder and CEO Scott Arneill brings a refreshing attitude to the fundraising space, saying that it’s important for non-profits to realize that there’s no silver bullet that will magically allow their organizations to convince people to give bucketloads of cash to their cause, or continue to donate until the cows come home. In fact, while many fundraising sites today are taking a social or peer-to-peer approach to giving, Pinkdingo (in spite of a somewhat humorous name) is serious about taking an alternative, and perhaps less social, approach. So, rather than enable charities to get their donors to ask friends (and their social networks) to make donations, Pinkdingo is focused on helping charities keep the donors they do convert. “We believe that scalable and replicable innovation for charities needs to be about retention, rather than creating more ways for charities to ask more people for money”, Arneill said.  Pinkdingo wants to make it so that charities don’t have to send reminder emails, and consumers don’t have to groan over the amount of email and snail mail they receive from charitable organizations. Of course, charities are operating in one of the few spaces where players have to reacquire their customers every year and the average attrition rate for first-time donors is between 50 and 80 percent, Arneill said. (Not to mention, solutions like Causes.com, Crowdrise, and Fundly are already working in this space and have some big names behind them.) Even for successful fundraisers, be they charity events and campaigns or what have you, once they’re finished, that’s it. The charity is left with email addresses to try to convert their customers again the following year.   So, Pinkdingo has identified the big opportunity in this space to be one that eliminates the donor reacquisition hurdle for charities by giving them engaging recurrence-based apps built for easy, run-in-the-background-type retention. Really, it’s the opposite of what’s typical in this space. Rather than build a cloud-based solution for the non-profit or charity, Pinkdingo wants to focus on the consumer-facing side — to make the giving process less painful for the one unloading their wallet.   As the specifics of the solution are still in testing, Pinkdingo isn’t yet showing all of their cards. But, from what I’ve been able to gather, in practice, this means that the startup will be launching some interesting micro-donation technology that will allow charities to get rid of that painful checkout process and better retain their customers. “From a charity’s perspective, recurring donors are the absolute holy grail”, said Firstgiving Founder Mark Sutton. “PinkDingo’s focus on recurring donations is one that helps charities build this important part of their giving programs … And coming at this as a frustrated donor that wants to invent better ways to give — not someone who just set out to build software for charities — could make Pinkdingo incredibly successful in doing the latter”.  More to come as Pinkdingo readies its product for the market.   Check them out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been over a year since Diaspora raised over $200,000 towards the creation of an alternative, decentralized social network. It was less than three months later that the first screenshots of their project hit the web, but since then — well, it would be disingenuous to say we haven’t heard anything (they sent out alpha invites just last month, for instance), but they sure haven’t been making a lot of noise over there. And it seems that although the original goal for their Kickstarter project was a mere $10,000, twenty times that amount still falls short of the money needed to develop and launch a competitor to the biggest site on the internet. So they’re asking for more. There’s no shame in that, of course: startups around the world go a-begging to their VCs, investors, and even friends and parents when the coffee runs out. And plenty of software projects are entirely funded by donations. Diaspora, in a slightly twee member email and blog post, explains that they need a bit of cash to keep the magic happening: At its core, Diaspora* is a new community, a uniquely free one, based on a positive vision of how we can all experience community online. It’s a community effort too.  Which is why so many people are contributing in whatever way they can.  And why we hope you’ll take a moment to give $25.-, or whatever you can, to support this vision today. And here is the donation link, if you’re so inclined. You’ll get an invite to the alpha if you’re not already in it. It sounds to me like they’re dealing with the reality of launching a product. While they could bang out the guiding principles, basic UI, and so on in a month or two of caffeine-and-righteousness-fueled hyperproductivity, the devil is, as always, in the details. Making it secure, scalable, flexible, and accessible are just as important as the idea behind it in the first place. After all, you only get one big launch — unless you’re Color. Hopefully the community will pull through with a little money to keep them going. I’m anxious to see the project, not because I’m especially displeased with Facebook or Google+, but because this, unlike those services, is truly centered on the user, not on advertising or data farming. That would be like a breath of fresh air these days. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Smack talk, that mainstay of online gaming since the invention of… well… the online game, is a fine art. To know when to call someone’s mother something nasty or to question your opponents sexual prowess is of paramount importance in almost any situation. That’s why Telesocial wants you to use their API to add voice chat to almost any program you can imagine, from office apps to games. Telesocial is an angel-funded start-up dedicated to voice. They initially worked at adding voice to social networks – including Facebook – and have now opened up their work to programmers. Their system allows one-click calling between app users (you could yell at your opponent in Carcassonne, for example) and the creation of in-app conference rooms for multiple users. You can use nearly any language to create what they call a TalkSpace and they have documentation for PHP, Objective-C, and command-line based instantiation.  Bill Waytena and Eric Stone founded the site in 2008 and they have always focused on voice in the social setting. “The Telesocial API allows developers to add innovative voice functionalities to their games and applications,” wrote Eric Stone in a release. “Our API translates user IDs into phone numbers, creating a phone-numberless voice service that connects people anytime, anywhere on their favorite device, the mobile phone.”  The service supports multiple authentication systems and turns social IDs into “phone numbers” that are uniquely addressable by your apps. The API works with Facebook, Twitter, Android, and iOS. Telesocial notes that the app is good for in-game chats (“Interested in calling the person who just watered your crops in that farming game?”) and call screening (“Want to screen your date with a phone call before going out with him or her – but not give out your number?”) and it supports anonymous mobile-to-mobile calling. It would also be perfect for a sort of illicit, sultry voice-only Chatroulette for lonely writers (just putting that out there, devs, no rush.) The API is available now. Project Page   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Newly launched Zoomingo is a shopping discovery app that aims to help you find nearby sales using either your Android or iPhone. With a focus on clothes, shoes, jewelry, handbags, beauty and home products, the app appeals to the everyday bargain shopper, not the daily deal seeker or the gadget guru looking to compare prices on HDTVs, for example. Sales data for major retailers is available all across the U.S., including from stores like Nordstrom, Macy’s, JC Penney, Williams Sonoma, Target, Kohl’s, Dillard’s, Wal-Mart and more. In total, Zoomingo has compiled sales data from over 70,000 retail outlets, using a combination of automated methods, manual data-gathering and “Deal Scouts” positioned in the top 10 U.S. cities. Currently, Deal Scouts are paid by the company to help pump up its deals database, but in the future, as the community grows, everyone will have the opportunity to be a scout. At that point, deal finders will be rewarded with badges, points and prizes, like retailer gift cards. The company was founded by language learning service Livemocha’s co-founders, Shirish Nadkarni (Zoomingo CEO) and Krishnan Seshadrinathan (CTO). When Livemocha started, it initially hired language tutors to kick-start the community for the first few months of operation, before the crowd arrived. Now, they’re doing something similar with Zoomingo’s scouts. (And how we wish other services would do the same, instead of launching deserted, crowd-less wastelands!) Even though my community (lovely Tampa, Florida) isn’t typically considered a top U.S. metro area, I was pleasantly surprised to find a ton of deals in my area for everything from kid’s toys to new handbags to beauty items and much more. In the app, you can follow favorite stores and other Zoomingo users. Also, if you choose to connect with Facebook, you can follow your friends and help Zoomingo recommend better deals to you. (E.g., if your gender is “female” you might be shown perfumes, “males” may be shown men’s clothes). As the community grows, you may find other users with similar interests and you’ll be able to virtually stalk their finds using a Twitter-like “follow” model. You can share your own finds too, by snapping a photo, adding a description and sale price. A future version of the app will offer integration with check-in services from Foursquare and Facebook, instead of the in-app “check in here” option which doesn’t really do much for now. Later on, Nadkarni tells us, retailers could use Zoomingo’s check-in to push out coupons or other offers. Retailers will be able to host in-store scavenger hunts at some later date, too. Nadkarni says he had the idea for the service after he took some time off from Livemocha, and found that his wife was having trouble locating nearby sales on mobile. So many apps were focused on price comparisons and barcode scanning (ShopSavvy, Red Laser), standalone check-ins (Foursquare) or promotions (ShopKick, Groupon), but there wasn’t a simple way to just browse local sales and search for items. Zoomingo is currently self-funded. The app is live now both on iPhone and Android.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Email productivity tool AwayFind announced today that it has closed its seed round of $800,000, led by 500 Startups and CAP Ventures, with participation from several angels, including Ben Lilienthal, Anton Sutton and Amir Banifatemi. The company is also launching its new product for business, available now in the Google Apps Marketplace. This new service includes an integrated Gmail gadget, new subscription plans starting at $10 per month and instant alerts. In case you’re unfamiliar with AwayFind, the company serves the oddly overlooked, but insanely practical need to address the “email overload” situation. Instead of constantly checking your inbox for important messages, AwayFind lets you configure when and how to alert you of urgent emails, using notifications that are sent out through SMS, phone calls (yes, old school calls!) or smartphone apps running on the iPhone or Android devices. Obviously, the target market for AwayFind’s revenue monetization options is the business customer, which is why today’s Google Apps offering makes sense. This more professional-grade service includes an administration control panel that enables I.T. to provision AwayFind for Google Apps users, check on account issues and manage the system. And as before, AwayFind uses oAuth for Google Apps email checking, and is fully PCI compliant.  Google Apps users themselves are able to set up AwayFind right within their Gmail in a process that take around a minute, the company says. Once integrated, users will see new links alongside their email messages that let them quickly follow a person or topic just by clicking.  Company-wide billing options are available, plus there are new plans for non-Google Apps users, like the $5/month personal plan (down from $15/month previously) which sends out alerts within 5 minutes. Monthly Pro plans and a Max plan are available too, for those who need faster alerts or who want to configure multiple email accounts. More details are available here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startup accelerator Advise.me is on a roll, having already increased its seed funding size and its advising team only a week after launch. Today, it’s adding six more high-profile executives to the team, including CEOs from notable startups like Evernote, Adly, CloudFlare, Graphic.ly and more. Today’s new additions include the following: Advise.me, whose “Global Startup Initiative” program encourages companies from all parts of the world to apply, has now received more than 400 applications from interested companies. That’s 200 more than it had received by the end of September. 200 every 2 weeks? Not bad, not bad at all. The organization will reveal its first company on Tuesday, but it’s a company Advise.me is building itself. (Hmm?) Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exactly 12 months after announcing that it had raised $20 million in financing, Care.com this morning revealed in a filing with the SEC (via FormDs.com) that it has secured another $25 million in funding. The round of new funding brings the company’s total capital raised to about $58.5 million. Investors in Care.com include VC firms New Enterprise Associates, Matrix Partners and Trinity Ventures, but it’s worth noting LinkedIn founder and prolific angel investor Reid Hoffman also participated in the company’s Series A round back in 2007. Care.com is a community website for families and ‘hundreds of thousands’ of care providers to connect, share caregiving experiences, and obtain advice about topics like child care, special needs care, tutoring, senior care, pet care, housekeeping and whatnot. Care.com provides mom-reviewed profiles, messaging, access to background checks, recorded references, and educational information on the caregiver interviewing process.  The company was founded in 2006 by female entrepreneur Sheila Lirio Marcelo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Viber Media, maker of fine Android and iPhone applications that let you call and text your buddies for free, is today releasing upgraded apps for both aforementioned platforms.  Viber 2.1 comes with a fresh voice engine, providing users with HD-quality VoIP calling and improvements of call quality when calls are made over low-bandwidth networks. Also new is the ability to share photos, enabling users to exchange picture messages by adding new or previously taken photos to texts, or sending photos by email or via Facebook. In addition, Viber is introducing location-tagged messages that allow users to identify their whereabouts to recipients. Turning the latter feature on and off can be done simply by tapping the location icon. Finally, Viber has made some minor changes to the app’s user interface, including the introduction of ‘landscape’ support for messages, and a new option to send a text message when a user is busy or doesn’t answer a call, among other improvements. Viber, which first launched its iPhone app 10 months ago, says over 30 million users have registered for the service to date, and roughly 18 million users actively use its apps on a monthly basis.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Raise your hand if you love your printer.  For most of us, printing is a chore to be avoided at all costs.  Faxing is even worse.  Who even still owns a fax machine?  Okay, if your hand is still raised, you can stop reading.  Everyone else, rest assured that the long-promised paperless office is on its way to becoming a reality.  There are still a few holdouts who keep dragging the rest of us back to printers, scanners, and fax machines for contracts, legal documents, and HR forms (hello, AOL!). At this point, whenever you have to print, scan, or fax a document, that creates friction.  One startup trying to eliminate that friction is HelloFax. Don’t let the name fool you.  HelloFax is more than just about digitizing faxes.  The Y Combinator company launched in February as a way to send and receive faxes via email, as well as sign documents electronically.  It now stores 20,000 electronic signatures on behalf of its users, and handles tens of thousands of documents a month.  Starting today, users can request electronic signatures through the service as well, which should help create more viral growth (if someone requests your signature, you have to use Hellofax to sign the document).  But these are just the first of many steps. “We are tackling the paper problem,” says CEO Joseph Walla.  “If you want to go paperless you need all of this hardware and software to make it happen.”  He is going after faxing first and making it easy to sign documents in the browser  (HelloFax converts back and forth from 30 different file types, and delivers it as a fax if that is required on the other end).  Think of it as a cross between eFax and EchoSign or DocuSign.  But even if you get rid of your fax machine, sometimes you still have to print, sign, and scan documents.  What if you could get rid of those as well? In order for the paperless office to become a reality, these friction points need to be eliminated. “The next major part of the puzzle will be scanning,” says Walla.  He is working on mobile apps that will turn your phone into a scanner and upload the documents to HelloFax.  Document storage and search in the cloud will follow.  “The big vision is that we become a repository for all of your important documents,” reveals Walla. Right now, HelloFax works with DropBox and an integration with Box.net is under way. Already, one-third of all signed documents going through HelloFax go through email. The company charges for sending faxes (the first 20 are free) and requesting signatures. TechCrunch readers who sign up here through Friday can get a 50 percent discount on the subscription plans) which normally range from $5 to $70 a month).  The company is targeting lawyers, accountants, realtors, and other small businesses, as well as internal departments in larger corporations where nothing gets done unless a half-dozen people literally “sign off” on something.  Y Combinator is using the service for all of its legal documents, and partner “Paul Buchheit has stopped using a printer, scanner and fax machine all together,” reports Walla. So why limit the name to HelloFax? For Walla, it is about awareness and customer acquisition.  He says that there are 16 million searches a month for the word “fax,” versus only a few hundred thousand for “electronic signature” and 18,000 for “paperless office.”  If the name turns out to be too limiting, he already owns the domains for Hello Contract, Hello Signature, and Hello Document. Latest headlines delivered to you daily NeuStar, the company that specializes in providing data insights and intelligence for web, telecommunications, entertainment, advertising and marketing companies, today announced that it has acquired TARGUSinfo (otherwise known as Targus Information Corp.) for $650 million in cash to beef up its realtime analytics and customer intelligence offerings. NeuStar also released its third quarter financial results today, in which the company said that it expects the acquisition to add more than 20 cents a share to its earnings next year and boost annual revenue to approximately $750 million. The market also took the acquisition as a good sign of things to come for the data insights company, as shares have gone up 3 percent in extended trading today. In a blog post today explaining the acquisition to its shareholders, the company said that it had been founded based on a mission to ensure customers that, when they move or change telephone carriers, “they could still be reached at the same number”. The company also said that, since its launch in the mid-90s it has overseen trillions of transactions and has built the “largest database of phone numbers in the world”. Over the past two decades, NeuStar began to apply its expertise at managing large data sets to the Web, providing Web, telecom, and other industries with insight and intelligence based on both their telephone and web data. In acquiring Targus, the company can now set its sights on becoming a leading provider of decision support to its clients based on its now-compounded realtime information and analytics. Leveraging both companies’ secure information pools gives NeuStar further scale in what is becoming a fragmented and growing market.  In application, as Targus is one of the largest providers of caller ID services, NeuStar will now be able to ensure that not only will a customer retain the same number when he or she switches carriers, but that the customer will be able to verify just who in the sam heck is calling them. And so everyone wins. The companies have a great deal of similar offerings and target comparable markets, so the acquisition seems like a win-win for both, allowing each to more quickly achieve a scale they may not have otherwise. For more, check out NeuStar’s blog post here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in April, 99designs raised a sizable, $35 million series A funding round from Accel and angel investors like Michael Dearing, Stewart Butterfield, Dave Goldberg and Anthony Casalena. Today, in celebration of the launch of its 99,999th design contest, the startup is announcing its own fund to give back to design students. The $99,999 fund will award 1,010 $99 bonus payments to students on top of every contest prize won beginning today — until the pool runs dry. For those unfamiliar, 99designs launched in 2008 to bring a crowdsourced design marketplace to designers and small businesses looking to find and showcase quality graphic design work, network, and build lasting professional relationships that benefit both sides of the table.  According to 99designs Co-founder Mark Harbottle, over $1.2 million is paid out to designers every month as a result of work commissioned by the community of SMBs in the startup’s eMarketplace. Since launching, the startup has grown into a hub of over 125,000 designers (from more than 192 countries), paid a total of $25 million to those designers, and is now uploading a new design to the site every six seconds. And, of course, it’s also launched 99,999 design contests to date. It’s a great resource for designers to be sure, who can expose their work to upwards of 1,200 new client opportunities at any given time. And 99,999 contests launched ain’t bad for a couple of years of work. No wonder Accel was so eager to invest in this fast-growing Aussie startup.  “What better way to celebrate [99,999 contests] than by offering additional support to design students across the globe as they acquire the skills they need to build their careers”, Harbottle said. For more on the new design fund for students, check out the details here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cloud storage platform Box.net has raised $81 million in Series D funding from strategic investors Salesforce.com and SAP Ventures with Bessemer Venture Partners, NEA, and prior investors including Andreessen Horowitz and Draper Fisher Jurvetson Growth participating in the round. The new investment brings Box’s total capital raised to $162 million (the $50 million round we reported on a few weeks ago is part of this D round). We’ve heard from sources close to the company that the Box’s valuation was above $600 million.  Box, which has 7 million users and stores over 300 million documents, is a cloud storage platform for the enterprise that comes with collaboration, social and mobile functionality. Box has evolved into more than just a fils storage platform, and has become a full-fledged collaborative application where businesses can actually communicate about document updates, sync files remotely, and even add features from Salesforce, Google Apps, NetSuite, Yammer and others.  The company was founded in 2005 by Aaron Levie and Dylan Smith out of their dorm rooms in 2005 with the goal of making it easy for people to access and share all their content, from anywhere. Today, the company provides storage solutions for 77% of the Fortune 500. Currently, 100,000 businesses are using Box’s service with 250,000 new users joining each month. This year, Box landed its biggest enterprise deal yet (and one of the largest cloud SaaS deals ever) with 18,000 seats with P&G.  Josh Stein, managing director of Draper Fisher Jurvetson, was an early believer of Box back in 2006. He says that two things stood out then that showed that the idea born out of Levie and Smith’s dorm room had potential. First, he explains Smith and Levie had one of the best work ethics he’d seen.  He recalled that when the firm would ask Levie and Smith questions about the product and business, the two fledgling entrepreneurs at the time would respond with thoughtful several page emails at all hours of the day. And second, the quality of the early product, which at that point was aimed at the consumer as well as businesses, was intuitive, well-designed and had a valuable functionality.  So why has Box been able to scale from an idea in a dorm room to a nearly billion dollar business? Stein says that Box’s cloud storage platform is a ‘terrific product’ that meets needs for variety of industries. He says that in the past few years, Box has created a new category in enterprise products of what the company intranet could have become.  NEA partner Kittu Kolluri agrees with Stein that Box has become an extension of the intranet, but adds that Box has also become a next generation extranet, as Box allows companies to share files and communicate with clients outside of the company.  Kolluri also highlights the growing trend of the consumerization of IT. He said that NEA looked at a few other companies in the enterprise storage and collaboration space but Box had the most compelling solution that offered enterprises both security as well as ease of use.  And because of its compelling product, growing revenue and strong user base, the company has even become a pricey acquisition target, receiving acquisition offers of $500 million. Kolluri says it was a smart decision for Box to turn these acquisitions down (NEA invested after these acquisitions were rejected). And Kolluri wholeheartedly believes that Box can and will be a public company.  Stein also believes in Box’s potential strength in the public markets. “Box absolutely should be a public company,” he says and confirms that an offering is in the company’s future plans. Stein says that as an SaaS company, Box’s recurring revenue model makes it an ideal public company. Of course, raising this growth round gives Box the flexibility of when they want to enter the public markets, adds Stein. Levie hasn’t planned on raising additional funds this year after picking up $48 million from Andreessen Horowitz and others earlier this year but because of the strong venture market, the company’s strong performance, and the growth in the cloud, an expansion round made sense.  “There’s so much change taking place in the enterprise, and we’re trying to build out go-to platform for how people use data, work, and collaborate,” Levie explains. Part of this is taking on more established enterpruse players like Microsoft. “We’re redefining how enterprises share and manage content on Box, while also building a powerful, open ecosystem of partners and developers to help our customers get more value and flexibility from their information than ever before possible.” Part of this is creating an ecosystem around the platform.  In November, Box plans to launch the Box Innovation Network, which will provide funding, consulting and other resources to developers building off of Box. Today, Box integrates with 120 applications, including leading cloud solutions including Salesforce, SAP StreamWork, Google Apps and NetSuite.  Box plans to use the new funding for product development, international expansion, and to further build out its infrastructure in the U.S., opening a third data center in 2012.   Of course, with this expansion will come challenges, says Stein. Growing fast can put strain on an organization. Box has rapidly scaled its team from 125 to nearly 300 employees in 2011 to date, including key senior hires from companies such as Cisco, EMC, Microsoft, NetSuite, and Oracle. Of course these executives has experience with high-growth companies and can help the company innovate while continuing to grow.  As far as strategic partners go, Salesforce and SAP are interesting choices. Salesforce, in particular, as a partner makes sense says Levie considering both of the company’s bets in the cloud. Box will be debuting integrations with Salesforce’s social network for the enterprise Chatter, and will continue to roll out deeper integrations in the future. And Levie says that most of Box’s customers user Salesforce as well. “Box is helping organizations make better decisions faster by bringing new innovation to business information,” said Jai Das, managing director, SAP Ventures. “As an investor and partner, we’re excited about how Box is reinventing content management and collaboration, and look forward to working with them to make customers more productive.” In the end, we want no more limits for businesses, says Levie. But he knows that to do this Box needs to innovate fast. “Steve Jobs reminded us of challenges of time,” he explains. “We’re trying to make the best use of our time and do a large amount of things rapidly. The ability to capitalize on this growth in the cloud is dependent on how quickly we can go to market.” We can definitely expect more products and features coming out of Box in the next few months. And clearly, we could also see a public offering as soon as next year. 2012 should be an interesting year for the cloud storage company. Checkout our recent video with Levie below.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Streaming music service Grooveshark is today announcing it has signed new licensing deals with worldwide distribution network DashGo and indie label NuGroove Records. DashGo is the larger deal, representing 115 labels, more than 4,5000 banks and over 50,000 tracks. NuGroove, meanwhile, is a small label with just over two dozen signed artists. DashGo’s top labels include Delicious Vinyl and Time Records, and its top bands are Coconut Records and Rock Mafia. NuGroove is more jazz-focused, with acts like Michael Lington and Bob Baldwin. Grooveshark now has a library of over 15 million songs and sees over 35 million unique visitors monthly. However, its questionably legal service has resulted in its app getting rejected by Apple and even banned by the Android Market in the past. It’s now available as an app for jailbroken iPhones and via the mobile Web at m.grooveshark.com. Full mobile access is available for $9/month, which is an increasingly hard sell when for just a buck more you can get still large, but legal, catalogs from MOG (12M), Rdio (12M) or Rhapsody (13M), for example. That said, Grooveshark’s fans love the selection, the app’s design and offline access the service provides via its apps and websites. And considering its issues, growing to 35 million uniques per month is rather impressive. Update: As is typical, Grooveshark PR immediately (and repeatedly) emailed us to correct the part where we call the service “questionably legal.” Analysis has been done to death on this one, so we’ll just link out to TechDirt’s smart take on the situation.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fab.com, which started out as Fabulis, a social networking site for gay men, has not only recently changed its name but also started from scratch with an entirely new business centered around online flash sales of design items. After raising a $1 million seed round, and another $8 million in Series A funding, back in July, the company has seen absolutely stunning growth after the pivot. The startup’s CEO, Jason Goldberg, says the site now boasts over 750,000 members, of which 40,000 signed up over the course of last weekend alone. And with 18% of its traffic (and 12% of its revenue) currently coming from mobile devices, the time was ripe for Fab.com to launch some apps. Today, the company is doing just that, debuting applications for Android, iPhone and iPad. Fab.com is already generating about $100,000 in sales on a daily basis, and Goldberg expects this number to shoot up quickly after the launch of the mobile apps, which are evidently free of charge. The app enables users to receive daily notifications when new sales go live, browse and purchase items, and share products on Twitter and Facebook, among other features. Screenshots galore:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Marketo, a company that provides an on-demand marketing software that allows businesses to optimize their sales and marketing efforts, is launching a new product today tailored to small businesses. Similar to Marketo’s SaaS for the enterprise, Spark aims to help businesses create revenue via channels like e-mail, lead generation, and optimization of site visits. Spark helps businesses create everything from email campaigns to other online and social channels, and then tracks the effectiveness of each one from a dashboard. Spark will also measure the impact of each campaign and program in real-time, including email volumes and leads generated, so users can see which campaign is successful and tweak accordingly. Spark also scores leads to show sales teams where the best opportunities are, and helps sales reps nurture leads. The software includes reusable email templates and the ability to automate triggered and batch email campaigns sent on behalf of specific sales representatives. Spark also tracks all prospect online behavior and company website activity. Marketo itself has seen success with its marketing software. The company was founded in 2006 and saw 315% growth in 2010, with 1,300-plus customers. Marketo has raised $57 million in funding. but also a ton of SMBs. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Checkmarx, an Israeli provider of static application security testing solutions, this morning announced that it has raised an undisclosed amount of financing in a round led by earlier backer Ofer Hi-Tech, with participation from cloud computing company Salesforce.com. The additional capital will be used to promote Checkmarx’s cloud-based source code scanning service CxCloud and ramp up sales and marketing efforts. Checkmarx’ solutions basically enable software developers to track, throughout the applications’ lifecycle, whether their code is following internal or external compliance requirements or is in accordance with the developing and hosting platform guidelines. Today, Checkmarx supports programming languages and frameworks such as C#, Java, C/C++, VB6 and PHP, as well as platform languages and frameworks such as Salesforce.com’s Apex and VisualForce.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – GENWI, which offers a nifty cloud publishing platform for mobile devices, has raised $4 million in Series A funding from Nexus Venture Partners and earlier backers Inventus Capital Partners and Quest Venture Partners. The company has raised a total of $5.1 million to date. Offering a cloud-based platform for publishing content on tablets and smartphones, GENWI says it has created and actively manages over 1,500 apps for ‘thousands of’ publishers. GENWI lets its clients publish real-time content once while delivering interactive apps across a wide range of mobile devices (iOS, Android, HTML5 and more). GENWI’s Cloud Publishing Suite offers a mobile-optimized content aggregation and management system, a custom interface layout engine, usage analytics, intelligent content curation based on analytics, social and ad networks integration, and app distribution – all from the cloud.  The additional capital will be used to build out the infrastructure and an extensive app network to offer more advanced monetization and distribution features for publishers, global expansion and the development of multilingual functionality. Founded in 2010, GENWI is a privately-held firm based in Los Altos, California. Jishnu Bhattacharjee of Nexus Venture Partners will be joining GENWI’s board of directors.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in May, BlueStacks raised $7.5 million in series A financing from Andreessen Horowitz, Ignition Ventures, Radar Partners, Redpoint Ventures, and more. This was all pre-launch. Why that kind of money for a startup that hasn’t launched a product yet? Because approximately 630 million new Windows PCs will be shipped by the end of this year, and because BlueStacks has designed downloadable software that will enable Android apps to run on (hopefully) all of them. And today, to put that money where its mouth is, BlueStacks is announcing the release of the first products that will be a part of its ongoing quest to do just that. For starters, the company is making available the alpha version of its app player for Windows that is basically a free software download that will give users one-click access to Android apps on any Windows PC, tablet, or laptop. (And the ability to view these apps in full-screen.)  BlueStacks hopes that this will be a boon for Android (and Windows) developers, as the software will give them access to the some-billion-odd PC users worldwide without requiring them to modify their apps for those desktops, laptops, and tablets. The BlueStacks team also said today that PC manufacturers and OEMs have expressed interest in making the BlueStacks App Player native on their various devices, as it targets both consumers and enterprises, from children’s educational apps to enterprise-level workflow apps — everything in between.  Along with its app player, the company is also launching a product it calls “Cloud Connect”, which is, well, a cloud-based service that allows PCs to become a veritable extension of any Android-based mobile device — and vice versa. Essentially, after downloading the free app in the Android Market, users can sync the apps on their Android devices with their PCs in one click, with capacity of up to 35 apps ported over from their Android devices. The app also offers a customer “Apps Channels” page where users can manage their apps in the cloud, viewing the apps that have been downloaded on their devices, including entries in the “Featured Apps Channel”, which offers direct access to the latest apps from developers.  With such a huge market in play, Cloud Connect and the App Player can certainly have global implications; according to BlueStacks President and CEO of BlueStacks Rosen Sharma: “The openness of Android is enabling innovation around the world. We are grateful to Google and others for their contributions. This is also a social equalizer in the US and countries like Brazil, India and China, where a large percentage of the population who can only afford smartphones can now enjoy and benefit from the ubiquity of apps on the Android platform“, he said. For more, check out BlueStacks and the App PLayer here, or peep the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s a lot of free, legal music working its way across the world wide web, and there are more than a few ways to access it. Which is terrific, but there are still quite a few paint points out there for we digital music listeners. How many times, for example do you listen to a song, recognize it, but forget who the artist is? Shazam addressed that problem by building a mobile app that lets you play the song in question and get a quick identification. Now, what about when you’re browsing the Web, a music blog, or a site that has a cool song embedded, you hear a song you love, but life gets in the way, and an hour later you’ve forgotten not only the name of the song but where you heard it? That’s why the geeky team at exfm (formerly Extension Entertainment) built a browser extension for Chrome that turns the Web into your music library by running silently in the background and indexing every MP3 file you stumble across. Exfm continues to check the sites you’ve visited, automatically building a library for you of songs you can throw away or turn into playlists. Exfm started as a Chrome extension and in June launched an iPhone app that brought its music-aggregating experience to mobile. This was a great addition, but not everyone has an iPhone or loves Google’s browser. So, this weekend the staratup rounded out its service by not only launching a redesigned extension for Chrome, but a full-feature web platform as well as extensions for Firefox and Safari.  Oh, and the team also launched an embeddable site player that allows site owners to get easy playback of MP3s, whether those be Soundcloud or Bandcamp tracks, on platforms like Tumblr, WordPress, and Blogger-run sites — and even mobile on iPhone and Android.   Exfm was built to be a social music application as well, and the service had previously given users the ability to tag the songs they’re listening to and share those with their friends, view a feed on songs from the people you follow on exfm and social networks, and more. This functionality remains, but with its new web platform, exfm has added an “Explore” section, which lets users access the so-called “Tastemakers” feed as well as a “Monthly Mixtape” to see what the experts are listening to and recommending, and visit sites of the day. Sites like Spinner, MTV Hive, and I Guess I’m Floating, for example, provide expert tastemaker musical recommendations. Users can now also browse music by genre or discover new artists through features like the “Album of the Week” tab or a trending section for seeing what’s popular in realtime.  According to exfm Founder and CEO Dan Kantor, exfm accounts now have access to over 20 million songs, and the service counts over 60,000 users on its platforms. And back in April, exfm raised $750K from Spark Capital, Founder Collective, and more to bring its total funding to $1.25 million. And for those keeping track, exfm has changed the songs that a user “Notes” in their library to “Loves”, just to make sure there’s no confusion. As Luther Ingram said, “you have to give love to get love”.  With an Android app on the way, Exfm is definitely becoming a terrific multi-platform, multi-browser, social resource for collecting and sharing the Web’s pervasive free music. Perhaps why the site was nominated for an MTVO award? Now if only they would add indexing for all that embedded YouTube and video content, I’d probably never leave. Check out the new exfm at home here and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBirchbox Co-Founders on the Second Wave of EcommerceWrapping his interview with Birchbox founders Hayley Barna and Katia Beauchamp, Chris Dixon tosses out some interesting statistics. Roughly “92% of commerce is still offline and actually Amazon only has 6% of the online.” Dixon says it appears the first online wave of commerce revolved around hard goods (tickets, books and dvd players) and we are potentially entering a second wave where soft goods (beauty products) have an opportunity to claim more of the space. Barna agrees there is an opportunity for soft goods and tells Dixon that Amazon presents their items “in a nice catalog way” but “being able to bring the content and put it next to the products I think enables new things to be sold.” Beauchamp then compares Birchbox to the retail experience of brick and mortar stores and adds, “we try and take you there.” In the below video Dixon asks Beauchamp and Barna what has surprised them since starting their company – before asking the two to offer advice to entrepreneurs. Barna delivers the first words of wisdom with, “figure out how to test it.” Make sure to watch the entire video for additional insights, along with episode I and episode II of this interview. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring Ben Lerer, Kevin Ryan and Soraya Darabi are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Spree Commerce, the open source, Ruby on Rails-based eCommerce solution, announced today that it has raised $1.5 million in seed funding led by True Ventures. Also participating in the round were Aol Ventures, and angels like Sean Glass. Spree has also brought on some notable advisors, including Dries Buytaert (Creator of Drupal), Luke Kanies (Creator of Puppet), Tom Preston-Werner (Co-founder of Github), and James Lindenbaum (Co-founder of Heroku).  Some readers may be familiar with Spree from Github, where the startup received hundreds of contributions and was translated into over 30 languages, making it one of the more popular open source projects on the social coding platform. As Spree grew in popularity, Founder Sean Schofield also created Rails Dog, a services company that focuses on building highly customized sites based on Spree’s platform to enable those without engineering experience implement the solution. Going forward, Schofield said, Rails Dog will continue to offer consulting services, but beginning today Spree has been officially incorporated as Spree Commerce Inc. and will focus primarily on refining its eCommerce platform to make it more flexible and customizable. Schofield also said that, while the team plans to offer additional support and services to its community, the platform will continue to be open source, and the licensing and terms of use will remain the same, intended for both personal and commercial application.  For those who may still be a little bit confused as to what exactly Spree does, the platform provides both hosting and support, as well as an easy customization process. Specifically, Spree gives businesses full access to its code so that businesses can create a customized checkout flow, with a single page or multi-page checkout with the amount of steps tailored to the business’ needs. Spree also uses semantic HTML, which allows users to begin with a minimalist style that can be customized and added to depending on the user’s requirements. The platform also offers a flexible product management system, inventory tracking, and the ability to add extensions to create a product assembly based on existing products, order processing, and more. And, in terms of the latter, finding the right gateway and merchant account can be a huge pain in the ass for eCommerce companies, so Spree enables integration with over 50 different payment gateways and services, including Authorize.net and Paypal.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Think there’s only one way to type on your phone? Think again. Siine, a Spain/UK-based developer of software that aims to change the way we communicate using touch-screen phones, is today formally launching Siine Writer for Android, a keyboard application that basically lets people personalize text messages and save time while they’re at it, in public beta. In addition to a traditional keyboard with letters and numbers, Siine Writer features a screen with special icons (called Siines, pronounced ‘signs’) that people can tap to build messages phrase-by-phrase, thus cutting short the time it takes to add greetings, signoffs, contact info and whatnot. The keyboard app can be downloaded with several Siines pre-loaded, but user can change them to fit their own styles, create new icons or adopt new ones from a virtual gallery. From my limited testing, I’d say it takes a while to get used to Siine, but once you do you start seeing the potential of the app rather quickly. I suspect it could be a hit with the teen crowd. Siine was founded in 2007 by Ed Maklouf, who previously did communication research at Stanford University. Earlier this year, the startup raised £550,000 in seed funding from Atomico Ventures, the investment vehicle established by Skype founders Niklas Zennström and Janus Friis.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBirchbox Co-Founders on Commerce SubscriptionIn part II of Chris Dixon’s interivew with Birchbox founders Hayley Barna and Katia Beauchamp, Dixon asks if Birchbox fits into what could be considered the trend of subscription commerce. Beauchamp believes they do. Barna meanwhile points out “there are a lot of different flavors” of subscription. In comparison to Diapers.com, Barna says Diapers solves “convenience” and “replenishment” while Birchbox offers a way for people “to find what they didn’t know they wanted.”  The three discuss additional companies that occupy the space such as ShoeDazzle and BeachMint. Recognizing their business model works, and that they could expand to sell more than beauty supplies, Beauchamp tells Dixon they chose the name Birchbox in order to offer flexibility to their users. For instance, Barna says “we have already tested non-beauty products” such as “tea or chocolate or stationary.” Continuing their conversation below, Dixon asks about the challenges of growing rapidly. Beauchamp says one of the challenges was, “we waited a little bit too long to hire and it is just like this vicious cycle of you don’t have time to hire, because you are really busying doing everything, but of course if you hired you would have more time.” The discussion then turns to talk of subscription becoming the new the daily deals business model, and the issues that go it (flooded with competitors for instance). Beauchamp says this is on their minds, but feels Birchbox’s distinct “voice” and “personality” offer defensibility. Make sure to watch both videos for additional insights, along with part I of this interview. Past episodes of Founder Stories with guests including Ben Lerer, Kevin Ryan and Lauren Leto are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBirchbox Co-Founders on the Inspiration Behind Their BusinessHayley Barna and Katia Beauchamp are co-founders of Birchbox and stopped by our studio to tape Founder Stories with Chris Dixon. Beauchamp tells Dixon that “Birchbox is a new subscription retail model” where customers fill out profiles and receive curated beauty products in the mail. The monthly fee is $10. If a customer is completely satisfied with a sample she can purchase a retail sized item through Brichbox’s online magazine. The idea for Bichbox sprung from real-life experience. Barna’s friend was a beauty editor and asked Barna to test top products that she had curated for her. Wanting to recreate the experience for others, Barna says they launched “a subscription model” and “put some editorial content around it.” Beauchamp adds, “every woman wishes that she had a friend that lived in New York and had access to this editor’s closet so that was kind of the customer side of the inspiration.” On the business side the thought was, “what industries haven’t really had their technical renaissance yet?” With an idea and industry in hand, they began testing the concept. In the video below, Barna tells Dixon they initially tested with 200 customers and eight brands over two months. They wanted to see if brands would be “excited about the fact that what we can give them ROI data” on their sampling efforts, data that had traditionally been lacking. And on the customer side, they wanted to see if customers would pay for samples if samples were delivered in an attractive presentation. In both cases the answer came back yes. Birchbox now claims more than 45,000 paid subscribers and is growing.  Last August the New York City-based startup raised $10.5 million series A from Accel, First Round and others. Make sure to hear more of Barna’s and Beauchamp’s story by checking out both videos. Past episodes of Founder Stories featuring leaders including Soraya Darabi and Lauren Leto here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest writer Joseph Puopolo is an entrepreneur and start-up enthusiast, who blogs on a variety of topics including green initiatives, technology and marketing. The word “green” is tossed around a lot as a catchall term to describe sustainable or environmentally friendly projects, businesses, energy, and more. Green construction and architecture, for one, are proliferating across the world, but when it comes to gauging how “green” a building is, for example, one finds that there are more than a few standards by which to determine its efficiency and sustainability. Enter Toronto-based Zerofootprint: A cleantech software and services company, which is leveraging competitive benchmarking between peers to help determine the “green” factor for any given building. Ron Dembo, the founder of Zerofootprint, contends that, if you want to motivate developers to improve the efficiency of a building, one can’t simply benchmark against everyone else, because each community has a different climate. Thus, the founder says that Zerofootprint aims to focus on benchmarking buildings against other buildings within a community to achieve maximum community efficiency. Zerofootprint uses its mapping and analytics engine to correlate multiple consumption and usage data points, like power usage, costs, emissions, etc., that it then plots on an interactive map for easy viewing. Currently, the company is working with over 100 customers that include entities like school boards and municipalities, and is leveraging its data in school districts to drive change at a school-by-school level. By tracking power usage at this local level, Zerofootprint is quickly able to see which schools are using higher amounts of power and thus incurring a higher cost. Through some quick analysis, it’s able to track and see that a school board may be paying $2,500 per child in electricity vs. $800 in another school, for example.  Some of these differences can be traced to age of the building, but another key component is behavior. By sharing this information with key stakeholders (including students, teachers, parents and administrators), the schools can then work to reduce energy costs. It is the hope that by reducing energy costs, school districts can focus on using those funds towards education instead of just keeping the lights on.  According to Dembo, through realtime feedback with its system, Zerofootprint has already been able to help certain schools achieve 20 percent energy reduction. He also says that it’s been interesting to see the reaction from stakeholders for installations that have not even taken root. Zerofootprint has recently deployed their solution with the Halton Catholic District School board. “Even in the early stages of this initiative, teachers and principals are excited about using theZerofootprint tool to engage students and encourage behavioral change when it comes to energy use in our schools. Our Board looks forward to using this tool to track carbon emissions and strive to continuously improve energy conservation”, says Erin Holko, Environmental Sustainability Officer of the Halton Catholic District School Board. Time will tell as to what the ultimate impact will be of actively monitoring power usage, but it is clear that they are getting traction from multiple levels of stakeholders. The key will be to see how this translates both in different regions and in both government and the private sector. As to cost, the minimum for a Zerofootprint installation is $25,000, which pays for the analytics and dashboard that help track the progress within the organization. For many companies with ever growing energy costs, this can help properly identify where the issues are and address them.  While school boards have been a key client, this is the tip of the iceberg as to who Zerofootprint wants to reach with this technology. The hope is that by empowering multiple stakeholders with information, it will act as a catalyst to spur behaviour change in many sectors and industries. This will not only change how people use power but how people use buildings. With a clearer understanding and correlation of these factors, it hopes to enable administrators to make clearer decisions. Zerofootprint has been challenged lately by competition from a new company in the space called OPower. But Dembo maintains that it has an edge over OPower, as it has begun to partner with banks to give special financial benefits to those who reduce their eco footprint. In any case, the entrance of OPower into the market is helping to draw more attention to both their offerings, indicating that there is room to grow, as the race to connect the dots between behavior and energy patterns is just beginning.  The key going forward will be not just the creation of linkages, but identifying which systems truly spur a ground-level change in behavior. Zerofootprint’s key differentiator will be tying performance to financial incentives. Zerofootprint has been courting banks and financial institutions to give preferential rates and products to organizations that become greener. If there were more incentives to operate in a more energy efficient manner, this could be a game changer for green initiatives. By involving real financial incentives, it is more likely to take hold in the mainstream rather than just with those who pursue green initiatives for altruistic purposes. It is clear that information is the first step to making a decision. Zerofootprint hopes that once information is put in the hands of multiple people, innovation will occur and people will formulate their own solutions to increase energy efficiency. Latest headlines delivered to you daily After graduating from TechStars Boston this spring, Brightwurks, a startup that makes web-based productivity tools with an emphasis on customer service, launched a new product called Help Scout that aims to bring quality email collaboration and support to small businesses.  The problem the startup hopes to address, as Brightwurks Co-founder and CEO Nick Francis sees it, is that, while the majority of companies feel that great customer service is mission critical to their business, on the Web, most still fail to interact with customers effectively. Part of the problem is that current solutions for customer relations offer a user experience that is automated and inherently impersonal. Furthermore, in the customer service market, there is a growing gap, Francis says, between email and help desks. Solutions like Zendesk and Assistly (the latter is now part of Salesforce) end up being too wide-ranging and complex for small businesses to integrate. It doesn’t make sense for a 10-person startup or online retailer to use a help desk, for example, when the team just wants an easy way to scale their email support.  As well-known players like Salesforce and NetSuite target the enterprise, Help Scout intends to cut down on the noise and focus on the one thing every online business needs: Email support. “Focusing on one area allows us to do that one thing really well, and be versatile there, as opposed to offering 50 different features that just lead to a complicated and mediocre overall user experience”, the Brightwurks CEO said. Thus, Help Scout is going for a help desk-CRM hybrid (that will soon sync with the CRM solution your business is already running), designed for any team of two or more that needs to share an email inbox, keep everyone on the same page, and offer personalized, high-quality customer support. According to Francis, 27 percent of emails sent by customers to online retailers are answered incorrectly, and most often that’s a result of the agent being unfamiliar with the customer. To solve this problem of familiarity, Help Scout allows agents to see every conversation that’s ever taken place with the customer, along with a public profile of that customer compiled from data on social networks, etc. (Similar to what Rapportive does for teams.) Emails from Help Scout look like one-on-one email threads, as they actually come from a real person with a personalized signature — not like the correspondence one would receive from a help desk. What’s more, to the customer, Help Scout is invisible; they don’t have to log in to an account or go through a complicated process to talk with a real person.  As to how it works? Help Scout is compatible with any email address, the startup simply gives a business a unique email alias, to which it can forward copies of all incoming emails. This gets a copy into Help Scout, and businesses can then set up their own outgoing server or use Help Scout’s for sending replies. Typically, setup takes about 4 minutes, Francis says, which gives it a bit of a leg up over the big players in the space, which often requires weeks of customization.  For all businesses, great customer service is essential, but because it can be time-consuming and complicated to manage, there’s a prevailing sense that the ROI is marginal. They instead turn to web-based and cloud services to automate and make CRM easier to deal with, in hopes of seeing more of a return on the time and energy invested.  Across the board, companies are investing more and more in online customer service (Salesforce acquired Assistly for $50 million in September), and there’s an abundance of opportunity in this market. As a testament to this fact, Help Scout is announcing that it has raised $435,000 in seed funding from a full roster of 17 angels and VCs, including Dharmesh Shah, David Cancel, Dave Balter, Zelkova Ventures, TechStars, and more.  Help Scout launched in May and has signed up over 500 companies so far. It’s still early, but part of the reason the service is attracting 100 companies per month is that its affordable at $10/month for individuals and $20/month for businesses. For startups and small businesses, this pricing makes it an appealing alternative to the bigs.  For more on Help Scout, check them out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some startups and apps (like Joypad and Brass Monkey to name a few) are turning your iPhones into customizable game controllers, while Wii and Kinect have turned you into the controller with their motion-sensing consoles.  You’ve heard it hundreds of times, but smartphone technology is advancing at an astonishing rate. Five years ago, video recording was still a novelty. Now, our phones can understand human speech, make reservations, and tell us our new shirt makes us look fat. Mobile gaming has evolved rapidly over the last few years as well, but most serious gaming is still done via the browser or home console etc., and all gamers could stand to take their gaming out of doors.  Riding the crest of smartphone innovation, and conceived as a way to get gamers off their couches, a new startup is opening its private beta today called Explorence, which is developing outdoor mobile games for Android — and soon for iOS.  What does that mean? Simply put, through its mobile apps, Explorence plans to transform your outdoor recreational activities into interactive video games. The startup wants to turn your jogs into “The Amazing Race” and your bike rides into Mario Kart. Users create their own courses and experiences to compete against friends asynchronously. Explorence augments these outdoor activities with music, check points, leaderboards, rewards, as well as “fail conditions” to create an immersive gaming experience for your outdoor recreatin’. For example, DASH!, the startup’s first title created using its technology, enables users to create, participate, and wager in races of any kind (asynchronously). First, a user creates a race via GPS by walking the course with smartphone or selecting start and finish areas. Users can then select how much virtual currency they want to wager on the race — at which point anyone who selects that race on the app gets to compete in that race, at the time or in the future.  Once you’re ready to go, the app will begin a countdown to start, a gun goes off, and you run your race (phone in pocket is probably a good idea). There’s musical accompaniment and sound effects udring your race, and once you cross the finish line you’ve created, the phone stops the clock and automatically enters your time onto its virtual leaderboard so you can see how you did compared to your friends. The racers earn coins for participating (and more for victory), which will later be redeemable for game enhancements and real world goods. DASH! works with any racing discipline: driving, cycling, running, snowboarding, etc.  For the past 2 months, the Explorence team have been testing these time-shifted races, and its small set of users are already averaging 3.9 sessions (races or races created) per day. For gamers who love the outdoors, it seems to have the potential to become pretty addicting. The key to Explorence’s technology and user experience lies in how the team has been able to use GPS, smartphone sensors, etc. to tweak geofencing around a particular point. For example, Explorence has two more titles in the pipeline, one of which will bring its technology to extreme sports — so that snowboarders for example will be able to put their phones in their pockets and go into the park to hit jumps and tricks. The apps will then measure distance, the amount of rotations, etc., giving them points and a soundtrack all the while. There are already some augmented reality first person shooter (FPS) games out there, which essentially turn your smartphone into gun and let you blast away at your friends. The technology is still developing, to be sure, but we’re clearly at a point now where the functionality is ready to go mainstream. Whether users are ready to adopt — that’s another story. The Explorence team, which consists of Mike Suprovici, Bill Gleim, and Mark Thompson, are graduates of the San Diego Founder Institute. Today, DASH! is available in private beta on Android (and will be launching on both iOS and Android later this year), and Explorence is offering 500 invites for its beta, which readers can take advantage of by going to the startup’s website and entering “TechCrunch” into the “Access Code” field.  Check it out and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily AnyMeeting, the free web conferencing service all your online meeting and conference needs, is today launching a redesign of its user interface, which brings the service an upgraded interface that makes it even easier to meet with your colleagues without actually having to see them in person. If that doesn’t get you excited, I don’t know what will. The company has also added a simultaneous video chat and broadcasting feature — a la Google+ Hangouts — that allows up to six participants to talk to each other and collaborate in realtime as they plan their takeover of the world.  The updates also include faster screen sharing and a cleaner in-meeting experience with improved screen management and web conferencing functions all offered in an easily-accessible menu bar. The SaaS meeting and conference service, which was launched in late 2009, allows users to host meetings of up to 200 attendees with no time limits, screen sharing, app sharing, recording, and social media integration. The company is really targeting small businesses and independent professionals looking to offer how-to videos, demonstrations, or host panels and seminars. (Vokle is another cool company in the space offering similar functionality.)  The company has raised seed capital from investors that include Tech Coast Angels, Pasadena Angels, and Maverick Angels.  In August, the AnyMeeting added PayPal integration to allow anyone with a verified PayPal Merchant account to sell tickets to both live and recorded webinars. The feature is integrated into the startup’s webinar system in hopes of making monetization simple for its users — all they have to do is set their ticket price (or offer discount codes) and viewers can pay using their credit card or PayPal account. The funds go directly to the AnyMeeting users that scheduled the seminar, at which point the service deducts a small fee for each ticket purchased. A small service charge, along with some non-intrusive advertising and strategic partnerships, are how the startup plans to make money. I had a chance to take the video-conferencing tool for a spin, and it worked smoothly, all from within my browser. It’s a great little tool for startups, so check it out. For more on AnyMeeting, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInA Peek At Postmates — The Uber For The Courier IndustryPostmates, the so-called Uber for the courier industry, debuted at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco this September. The service aims to transform this niche industry by offering an on-demand delivery service that connects local couriers and bike messengers to anyone who needs a package sent (anything from a toaster to a stuffed elephant) within the confines of their city. Postmates is speedy, and it’s cheap. (Check out our initial coverage of the startup here.) The service also offers a same-day shipping API for brick-and-mortar retailers, so that for less than $20, retailers will enable local customers to order goods online and have them shipped the same day. And not only the same day, but Postmates Founder Bastian Lehmann tells me that the average delivery time is 37 minutes. (The startup has already facilitated 600+ deliveries.) And couriers and bike messengers are going to love this because, according to Lehmann, they spend the majority of their day in down-time, waiting for the next call. Couriers are, by and large, independent contractors — unlike most cabbies — so Postmates gives them the ability to deliver far more packages than they would under normal circumstances. That means more income, happier couriers, faster delivery times, and thus happier customers. I sat down with Postmates Co-founders Bastian Lehmann and Sean Plaice to ask them a few questions about Postmates, how it works for messengers and end users, and whether or not they’re disgruntled former FedEx employees. Postmates is up and running with 50+ merchants in San Francisco, and the team plans to begin rolling out in other cities over the next year. Check out the demo and let us know what you think. Mom, if you’re reading this, I’m sorry I was slouching. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Hipchat, the group chat service we use internally, has just added DIY emoticons – with a catch. If you’re not familiar with them, Hipchat’s emoticons are quite fun. They have most of the major memes as well as famous faces (try (arrington)). Now, however, you can add your own famous faces. Our favorites are (jobs) and (gates) as well as (yuno) and (lol). Try them.  In a clever bit of viral marketing, the site allows you to refer friends and you get four emoticons for each paid referral. We were able to get a few so far, adding Matt Burns and myself to the pantheon of 25 pixel by 25 pixel icons available to us during our daily bull sessions. The emoticons are only visible for your group, so there is little if any duplication. Hipchat was co-founded by Pete Curley and most recently added iPad and iPhone apps in an effort to beat competitors like Campfire.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Audio platform SoundCloud and social media story-making tool Storify are partnering up today to allow the collection of sounds into Storify streams alongside tweets, Facebook posts, photos and videos. This news comes only a day after SoundCloud was taken down by a distributed denial-of-service attack, which kept the service offline and unstable for over a day. (It’s back up now, so it should be good to go.) SoundCloud is typically known as a service that allows unsigned musicians, D.J.’s and music hobbyists a way to host their tracks online, post them to social networks and friend and follow other users. However, SoundCloud isn’t limited to hosting music – it can support any type of sound, including voice. For that reason, the addition of SoundCloud can be helpful in the creation of the news summary type streams that Storify can help create. For example, here’s a stream summarizing the #OccupyWallStreet protests. At the top, a SoundCloud embed includes a reporter narrates what he’s seeing.  Here’s an example of SoundCloud being used to report from a conference. Another example involves interviewing subjects for a “man-on-the-street” style report. Of course, SoundCloud’s integration isn’t limited to news reporting. Here’s a Storify post for a music competition, as another example. Other musicians could create Storify summaries of how their SoundCloud track was discussed on social media, too. The integration of SoundCloud in Storify is live now.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The easiest way to describe stealthy mobile payments startup ZipPay is to say it’s like Square and Venmo had a baby, and this was the result. Like Square, the startup aims to address the needs of individuals and small business owners who can’t afford the high fees associated with having their own merchant accounts by allowing them to accept credit card payments using their phone. Meanwhile, like Venmo, the solution will also provide a way to perform person-to-person payments. But there are some key differences. For starters, unlike Square, ZipPay won’t use a dongle. It also promises rates lower than Square’s 2.75% per swipe. How this will be done, however, is still unclear. Instead of dongles that attach to the phone’s headphone jack, as is the case with Square, ZipPay will offer a mobile wallet solution that uses some undisclosed patent-pending technology. To load cards into the wallet, ZipPay is leveraging Card.io, the new software development kit (SDK) for mobile developers that uses a combination of computer vision and machine intelligence to “read” a card held up to the mobile phone’s camera. This technology allows faster entry of credit card information into a mobile application, when compared with manually typing in numbers on a small keyboard. Unlike Square’s wallet-like Card Case, which provides digital “tabs” for local merchants, ZipPay’s wallet supports all major credit cards, including Visa, MasterCard, Discover and American Express. Store cards, discount cards and membership cards will be supported in the future. The card data is stored directly on the device in an encrypted format, however, this is not an NFC-enabled mobile wallet system. There’s a mandatory 4-digit PIN code for the ZipPay app, but how the card data is sent between the customer and the merchant or two ZipPay users remains a mystery. Company CEO Ryan Stevens says he isn’t ready to reveal this part of the system for competitive reasons, but it’s possible that the app somehow uses smartphone sensors to connect the two devices, each which need to run the ZipPay app. Perhaps something like Bump?  On the merchant’s side, like Square, ZipPay will allow for expedited sign-up, so new users can start accepting credit cards immediately. The company runs a basic background check on the spot, and if there aren’t any obvious red flags, the account is approved. Merchants can charge up to $1,000 that first day (the same as Square’s manual entry/card not present limit). Later on, when the full background check goes through, the limit is dropped. ZipPay has a banking partner on the backend (unnamed for now) and payments are deposited into merchant’s accounts within 1 to 3 days, implying an ACH system is involved. The second part of the ZipPay system is the feature which involves peer-to-peer payments, something very much like the startup Venmo. In this case, both people would need to have the ZipPay app on their devices and then, again using the undisclosed technology, payments can be instantly sent between the devices. Because the company is not ready to detail its technology, it’s hard to compare what it’s offering with Square, PayPal, Google Wallet or others. We do know it’s not NFC and there’s no dongle, but that’s about it. We also know that it plans to take a portion of the processing fees, like Square, and the app will also include “a small ad,” which may be how it plans to undercut Square. Security is also a big question here, considering that encrypted data stored on the device may still be vulnerable if the device is compromised by a virus or malware, for example. Also, in NFC’s case, each contactless card stored on the device generates a cryptogram to exclusively identify each transaction. No two cards share the same key and the key is never transmitted. How will ZipPay’s system work? Is it storing full mag stripe data on the device? What level and type of encryption is involved? What’s being done to protect the data on both ends? During transmission? The company says it stores no credit card data on its own servers, only the technology used to decrypt the data on your device. Using an online dashboard, lost or stolen phones can be immediately disabled from making payments, but that does not guarantee that the credit card data couldn’t somehow be extracted from the device before you realize your phone is gone. Until the system launches into beta, many of these questions may remain unanswered. ZipPay will offer iPhone and Android apps, starting with the iOS version, launching in Q1 2012. It’s accepting beta sign-ups now. Latest headlines delivered to you daily LivingSocial is busily expanding its daily deal footprint both in the U.S. and abroad.  According to a new SEC filing, LivingSocial issued $143 million in stock as part of a “business combination transaction, such as a merger, acquisition or exchange offer.” While the filing does not specify the acquisition or acquisitions in question, the most likely candidate is LivingSocial’s acquisition of TicketMonster in Korea, which was agreed to in August.  TicketMonster is a daily deals site with 2 million members in Korea and Malaysia.  It employs 600 people, who now work for LivingSocial. The $143 million could also include Turkish daily deals site Grupfoni, which happened around the same time.  Update: I’ve confirmed the entire amount is for TicketMonster and the Grupfoni acquisition has not yet closed.  LivingSocial itself raised $400 million last April and was considering an IPO filing, which may have been pulled due to market conditions (and the investor backlash competitor Groupon is facing).  Update 2: The full price was $350 million in cash and stock. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Officially launching to the public this week is a solution called Ondango, which allows businesses to launch their own social commerce platform on Facebook. The shopping system can be set up in a few quick steps to let customers browse and purchase their favorite products without ever having to leave the warm confines of the social network. In other words, Ondango allows merchants to sell their products from the Facebook page, provide customers with a secure transaction mechanism, all while leveraging Facebook’s viral and social features. Yet, as eCommerce on Facebook is a relatively new feature for most web surfers, Ondango wants to make sure the solution is both easy for merchants to integrate and is designed in a format they’re familiar with, which is why shops closely resemble Facebook’s look, feel, and usability.  The Ondango-powered shop below shows an example of what the setup looks like, in this case for a German band, as Ondango is headquartered in Berlin. The solution is also available in English, Spanish, and Polish.  And on the other side, to get at that ease-of-use for customers who aren’t particularly familiar with social commerce on Facebook, the most appealing aspect of Ondango is that it doesn’t require users to accept an app request. There are a lot of Facebook commerce solutions in the space, but adoption has been slow among brands and consumers alike. Because, as Ondango Co-founder and CEO José Matías del Pino puts it, the idea of putting an eCommerce solution on top of Facebook seems complicated, and most brands are just starting to get their social media teams in place and use new social channels to market and sell their products.  What’s more, from a user perspective, consumers are worried that Facebook is somehow involved in the transaction process, that their might be grabbing their credit card information, etc., he says. Thus, Ondango offers a solution in which all commerce happens through Facebook fan pages, and users aren’t redirected to merchant sites, yet the processes happen through the startup’s servers so that Facebook doesn’t have access to purchase data.   While Ondango offers users the ability to share purchases with their friends, leave comments, subcomments, and post purchases to their walls, the real focus, de Pino reiterates, is on the conversion rate for its shops. That’s why the startup went after a design that looks like it was implemented by Facebook, is straightforward and easy to use, and doesn’t require an app request.  Of course, launching an app request to purchase gives the host (like Ondango) access to the user’s Facebook data, and while the CEO said that, of course, all companies want access to that, the Ondango team found during their beta that 80 percent of users would drop out of purchases when they received an app request. So, though Ondango may not be able to take advantage of data mining and cross promotion et al, they have built a solution that consumers can trust — and with that trust, a solution that will hopefully encourage conversion for merchants. As to how the startup is going to make money? Ondango will be charging a monthly fee as well as a small transaction fee, under three different plans depending on the size and inventory of the shop. (Readers can check out more on pricing here.) The startup is also currently offering a 30-day free trial for new users. Ondango is a graduate of the Founder Institute Berlin, and attracted 50-plus customers and 150K transactions during closed beta, as well as a 40K scholarship from a Berlin university, as well as a small round of angel investment. The startup was also this week named one of the winners of the White Bull Summit in Barcelona, which recognizes the most innovative European tech startups.  For more on Ondango, check them out at home here or watch their video introduction below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily I caught up with Peter Vesterbacka, Mighty Eagle at Rovio, the creators of the successful Angry Birds franchise, yesterday at the Planet Of The Apps conference in London. It wasn’t a huge secret, but I certainly didn’t know this: Vesterbacka tells me you will soon be able to buy Angry Birds-themed cookbooks; actual physical books and ebooks for Kindle, Nook and iPad. Full disclosure: I got one of these limited-edition Angry Birds cookbooks for free (hence the pictures above and below). Also, I’m not much of a cook (hence why I accepted the book in the first place). In all seriousness, Vesterbacka tells me there have been 400 million downloads of the Angry Birds apps to date, and that its merchandising business is chugging along nicely as well, with about 10 million plush toys having gone over the counter already. I also bought two for our baby boy recently. Rovio is on a mission to turn Angry Birds into a brand as iconic as Nintendo’s Mario and Mickey Mouse, Vesterbacka adds. Gotta love ambitious (European) startups. Enjoy the interview:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily I don’t want to be hyperbolic or hysterical (even though I’d like to be), but the student loan situation in this country is awful. The number of students who default on their student loans continues to increase, and has doubled in the last six years. More than two-thirds of students graduating from colleges and universities borrow money — with an average of more than $23,000 of debt. (And one-in-ten graduate with more than $40K in debt.)  Earlier this year, Peter Thiel (the Paypal co-founder and well-known hedge fund manager and venture capitalist) predicted that the next big bubble the country faces is not in tech, housing, or finance — but higher education. Whether or not one agrees, there’s really no doubt that a new focus on the costs of education and the growing burden of student debt (and loan default) is long overdue. This is the thinking employed by Brendon McQueen, who is today launching in private beta a web platform called Binksty that aims to give students a comprehensive one-stop shop to manage loans, pay off debt, as well as educate them on the best ways to save money. For those familiar with the current web landscape, there are some other awesome companies tackling this problem, like Edulender (now Alltuition), Simpletuition, Fynanz, and PeerTransfer, all of which are tackling specific aspects of the student loan life span — namely, finding and supplying loans and making international education payments easier.  Binksty, on the other hand, wants to go one step further, aiming to facilitate the student loan process from filling out FAFSA paperwork and finding the right loan to organizing and paying off said loans. According to McQueen, the startup is currently in discussions with lenders (who, as mentioned above, are facing the highest default rates in years) to create a mutually beneficial solution that will help curb defaults by offering students a simple way to view their loans and find an alternatives to default, ramp up sales via the startup’s loan marketplace, and cut back on the lender’s customer service costs by way of Binksty’s automation process.  McQueen, who himself graduated from Columbia with 12 loans and over $100k in debt, knows that the goal isn’t easy to achieve, but the value proposition is enormous: “What we’re doing is saving students and graduates time and money while working with the lenders to streamline the entire process so that everybody wins”, he says.  Thus, the startup’s revenue streams are part of the very process of saving students money, since they’re already burdened with debt. For example, loan aggregation on Binksty is entirely free, while features like prepared tax documents will come at a small price. (Though McQueen assured me that the costs of these features will remain competitive — and below — with that of its competitors.) The startup is also putting together an algorithm that will help students better manage a series of loans, so that, for example, when they enter their loan information, the platform will tell them that loan 1, 2, and 5 are qualified for repayment. Or that consolidation is an option and that if they do choose to consolidate, Binksty will tell them what the plusses and minuses are of doing so. Pretty cool. An all-in-one service that lets students gather their (multiple) loans online, analyze their debt, set reminders for payment, etc., and realize financial goals while saving money obviously has great appeal for students and graduates alike, many of whom continue paying off debt through their twenties. If Binksty can bring on a wide array of lenders, its value will be two-fold. The startup currently counts Ophir Tanz, Co-Founder and CEO of GumGum, as well as John Weir (CEO Planning for College), and David Harmon (President and CEO of Education Loan Servicing Corporation) as members of its advisory board. Oh, and we’ve also heard word that the startup has raised the interest of a high-powered director at one of Silicon Valley’s most well-known companies. We can’t say who, but let’s just say, the startup is attracting some great advising talent. For readers interested in receiving early access to Binksty, navigate over to the sign up page here and enter this code: De.1r5ieZ. And for a multimedia introduction, check out the video below: http://vimeo.com/25419409 Latest headlines delivered to you daily Swype has been blowing minds since it first launched at TechCrunch 50 back in September of 2008. For those unfamiliar, Swype is the maker of an awesome app that allows users of touchscreen mobile devices to type messages with one swipe of the finger or stylus motion across the screen keyboard. The alternative (and patented) input method has proven to be super speedy, allowing data entry at over 40 words per minute, and has swept across Android devices. Today, thanks to the reporting of one Michael Arrington via Uncrunched, we’ve learned that Swype has been acquired by Nuance (the makers of voice recognition technology) for over $100 million. The deal was confirmed by the Wall Street Journal, which pegged the numbers to be between $100 and $150 million. The official announcement is expected to be made tomorrow.  Nuance, which has a market cap of about $6.7 billion, has been on an acquisition roll of late, snatching up speech recognition software company SVOX in June, at the same time announcing the close of its $157 million acquisition of software developer Equitrac.  The speech recognition giant has also been in the news of late, as it is has been in negotiations with Apple over licensing for Lion OSX. What’s more, while Apple did not confirm, MG held that Nuance is also a large part of the technology behind Siri, which will be native on all iPhone 4Ses. As MG wrote yesterday, “even if Apple wanted and tried to come up with their own voice technology backend for Siri, they would have a hard time doing so without infringing on some of Nuance’s patents. Patents which Nuance CEO Paul Ricci is very well known to enforce to their maximum extent”. What’s more, it will be interesting to see how Nuance resolves the fact that it now owns both Swype and T9, another predictive text app. And, as Mike wrote, it just so happens that T9 “competes directly with Swype” and was also founded by Cliff Kushler, the very same guy who co-founded Swype. Will the two products join forces, or is T9 headed for the trash heap? I’m sure Nuance will have more information on that tomorrow, or in the coming weeks. Swype had raised just under $14 million in outside investment since 2008 and just closed its series C back in July. The acquisition is a big win for the startup, its investors (Samsung Ventures, Nokia Growth Partners, Benaroya Capital, DoCoMo Capital, Ignition Partners, and more), and for Nuance. With Swype’s app appearing on (what will soon be) 100 million devices, and smartphone and touchscreen adoption skyrocketing, these technologies will no doubt be a big part of our mobile future.  Update: The exact amount paid for Swype, according to an SEC filing, is $102.5 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The last company Shawn Fanning and Sean Parker started together was Napster, over a decade ago. Now they are teaming up again to create a new startup called Airtime (previously codenamed Supyo). The two have completed an $8.3 million series A financing from Founders Fund, Accel Partners, Andreessen Horowitz, Yuri Milner, Ron Conway, Marissa Mayer, Ashton Kutcher, will.i.am, Scott Braun, and TechCrunch founder Michael Arrington. Fanning will be CEO and Parker will be executive chairman. Parker will be spending more time in California to take an active role in the company, and changing his position at the Founders Fund from Managing director to a general partner. “I had to figure out a way to step back from the venture fund in order to dive full time into this,” he tells me. Parker also has a “quasi-operating role at Spotify,” where he is a board member and helps with everything from product design to negotiating with the music labels and its recent Facebook integration. The third founder is CTO Joey Liaw. The company has about a dozen employees already and is looking for a founding engineer with experience in scaling a high-availability site that can handle a ton of realtime, concurrent users. Inspired by Chatroulette, Airtime will be random, realtime and include a live video chat component. Fanning and Parker are still vague on specifics, but don’t expect it to look too much like Chatroulette. Parker originally helped recruit Fanning from Path, where he was CEO, to work on Chatroulette at the behest of Yuri Milner, who is now one of Airtime’s investors. “They lacked a clear vision and a management team. Yuri asked me where would you take this thing and who should run it,” says Parker.  The collaboration with Chatroulette’s young founder Andrey Ternovskiy didn’t work out, but it got Fanning and Parker thinking about a larger problem. “With all due respect to Andrey,” says Fanning, “it was just scratching the surface of what it could be—a universal host that is introducing people, smashing people together.” “It was fascinating to watch in the sense that it was not a virally engineered product,” says Parker. “Here you have a product growing through organic word of mouth. It looked like Napster in 1999.” Chatroulette also eliminated the anxiety of meeting new people by randomly pairing users. It ended up being too extreme and attracting a lot of naked dudes, but there it was obviously tapping into something essential. “We are trying to address the problem of what has happened the last 10 years of social media,” says Parker, who was also the founding President of Facebook. “Your social network has become more rigid and constraining.” Airtime, it seems, will be more about meeting new people. “Facebook is about identity, the people you already know,” says Parker. “It has little to do with people you don’t know.” So how will Airtime help you meet new people? Fanning and Parker won’t say. But if I had to guess, I’d bet that it will be around interests. Think about it. If you combine the random smashing together of people that Chatroulette was so good at with an interest graph that matches up people based on topics and activities they care about, you’ve got the beginnings of an online party with Airtime playing the host. The name Airtime, though, suggests that it could also be a platform for personal broadcasting as well. Will these live video chats be one-to-one, group chats or public broadcasts like on YouNow, a live video startup that launched at Disrupt SF? Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Consider this scenario: Two grandmothers walk into a Harrah’s hotel/casino in Las Vegas. Both ladies put $5 into a slot machine, and unfortunately, neither hits the jackpot — both lose their $5. One of these kindly old ladies will go on to spend thousands of dollars at Harrah’s, while the other will walk away without spending another dime. How do you know which will continue to spend? Applied to a larger picture, companies spend millions of dollars on technology, like cognitive and behavioral analysis and intelligence mining, to attempt to create a model that will accurately predict which of their new visitors will be the better customer. As you can imagine, if businesses can target their marketing, deals, loyalty programs, etc. at the “better” customer, their dollars are better spent.  Of course, the refined analysis, software, databases, and specialists required to run predictive modeling is expensive, time-consuming and is really only affordable for the corporate giants of the world. Enter Trooval, a Bay Area start-up that is helping companies distinguish between the customers that will spend money and the customers that won’t, so that they can target them accordingly. Trooval Founder and CEO Jonathan Lowenhar tells me that companies like Capital One and AMEX have found ways to integrate effective realtime predictive modeling into their customer acquisition strategies, but he says that only about 5 percent of businesses are taking advantage of this kind of technology.  Lowenhar spent 15 years in Las Vegas in the casino gaming industry, part of the time as VP of Marketing at Harrah’s, where he learned firsthand that customers at casinos (and across industries) are all generally treated the same. There wasn’t a science to how casinos were approaching their customers. At Harrah’s, the team developed a system that would aggregate all the known information about the little old ladies of the world, including the speed at which they play the game, how much they spend, the distance they live from the casino, etc. Of course, Harrah’s had to hire a big team to do this.  Lowenhar says that this is the marketer’s dream: Being able to understand, for any given consumer, where they sit in regard to loyalty potential. Thus, the ultimate value proposition for Trooval is the ability give marketers realtime, actionable scores on consumer leads, prospects, and their existing customers. Trooval does this by way of a simple alphanumeric score — that tells marketers just that. Through its predictive analytics software tool, Trooval allows companies to access accurate predictions with one cloud app. Predictions are based on that mash of readily-available public consumer data and companies can take advantage of the startup’s API connection to enrich their businesses’ leads with third party data from both public and boutique sources.  While Trooval has begun working with certain retail outlets and companies in the time-share industry, their software is applicable to auto sales, financial services, mortgage, and student loan lending companies — any industry where the cost of sales and marketing (and the potential sales price) is high.  Too many people suffer from flawed credit reports today, and they really are no longer an accurate prediction of who can pay and who can’t; what’s more, just because a consumer has made a big purchase in the past, doesn’t mean that they will again. Companies need to know this kind of information, who is most likely to pay for that big high ticket item? The B2B2C company can work with businesses to have them up and running on Trooval in just a few weeks.Trooval has raised $2.8 million in seed and series A rounds from North Bridge Venture Partners and AngelList.  For more on Trooval, check it out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily How many 21-year-old serial entrepreneurs do you know? Probably not many, but now you’ll know one. Jess Mah launched her first startup at age 13, her second in high school, and is now working on her third, which just may be, as they say, the charm. For those unfamiliar, Mah’s third startup is called inDinero, which offers software to help small businesses track and manage their finances in realtime. Unsurprisingly, the startup has been tagged the “Mint for small business”. The Y-Combinator backed startup also has some high-profile backing, as it raised $1.2 million in September of last year from angels like Yelp’s Jeremy Stoppelman, Dave McClure of 500 Startups, Microsoft’s Fritz Lanman, Intuit’s David Wu, Slide’s Keith Rabois, YouTube’s Jawed Karim, and more. Since launching in July 2010, inDinero has seen more than 20,000 businesses register to use its service, and today it’s processing several billions of dollars in revenue from these businesses, and is tracking approximately 5 million transactions every month. InDinero is a pretty nifty tool for local businesses, as it enables startups and small business owners to quickly enter information from their financial accounts into the startup’s dashboard, at which point the service will fetch bank statements, financial docs, and more, automatically organizing transactions into pertinent categories. It will even update your budgets through its simple dashboard, and since it has all or your financial information categorized and sorted, it can provide you with the latest set of reports in a few minutes — without having to call your accountant.  Of course, there’s one small problem here. The IRS requires small businesses to track their receipts on their transactions, so inDinero is today launching a full-service feature for owners looking to track both financial transactions and business receipts in one place. Now, instead of wondering what you bought at Walmart or Amazon last month, you can see the full receipt next to every single transaction.   Mah tells us that the issue here is that most business owners keep their receipts in a shoebox, and the team has heard countless stories from accountants who’ve watched as their clients bring in a shoebox full of receipts to be processed at tax time. Most businesses aren’t tracking the electronic receipts they get after making online purchases. And as long as entrepreneurs have an accounting system or excel spreadsheet alongside a shoebox of receipts, they don’t have organized business finances, she says.  solution to merge the two together under one roof, in an automated way. So, inDinero is merging the two together under one roof, in automated way. Plus, the startup is now offering its users three ways to send their receipts to inDinero: Users can now upload, email, or snail-mail their receipts to inDinero, at which point the team will automatically match those receipts to the corresponding transaction on their financial dashboards. If the receipt doesn’t match with the transaction, inDinero will send the user an email alert.  And the best part for users? The receipt tracking is free. (inDinero is still a freemium service, of course.)  Accountants are also going to love this, as they hate when clients bring in a mess of paper receipts. So, inDinero is going to help them do their jobs, free of charge. The startup will process all paper receipts, and automatically upload them to the right transaction, making it viewable to the user in his or her dashboard. What’s more, the user who sends in the biggest suitcase full of receipts will receive a free year-long subscription to inDinero and a $300 AMEX gift card. (Though this offer only lasts through October.) With this added functionality, there’s little reason not to use inDinero. In fact, I’m gathering my paper receipts as I write this. That gift card has my name written all over it. For more on inDinero, check out Evelyn’s interview with Jess Mah here or visit the startup at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At a press conference with Mayor Bloomberg to celebrate the opening of Twitter’s New York City offices, co-founder Jack Dorsey gave the Big Apple his endorsement as a startup capital.  “New York will have a thriving tech community and we will help build that,” he says. Twitter already employs 30 to 40 people in New York City and its new office can accomodate 100 people.  At Twitter’s current rate of hiring in the New York City, that should hold it for at least a year.  Dorsey points out that New York City has more Twitter users than any other city and the state has the second largest number of Twitter developers. Twitter’s increased presence in the city will contribute to the budding startup culture.  Dorsey notes the importance of mentorship and support networks to building a startup ecosystem.  “With every new tech startup, the desire to get together and talk about the challenges” goes up, he says. New York City also excites Dorsey as a petri dish to experiment with mobile products especially.  “New Yorkers live in a very different way  because of the density,” he points out.  “I am most excited about . . . opportunities to explore the density of the city.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive-Enterproid, the developer of a platform that allows professionals to maintain completely separate professional and personal profiles on a single Android device, has raised $11 million in Series A funding led by Comcast Ventures, with Google Ventures and Qualcomm Ventures participating. Called Divide, the platform allows users to create a completely separate profile on Android devices that includes enhanced security, access control, remote wipe capability and a set of enterprise-grade versions of applications like email, a web browser, instant messaging, and SMS. Users can switch back and forth between their professional and personal profiles but no data can cross the division, so that no business content is compromised in the personal profile. And Enterproid comes with a bunch of useful tools, including the ability to segregate voice and data usage for work, or hand a child a phone without the risk of the child accidentally emailing or calling a contact. Enterproid’s Divide also allows users to manage devices from the cloud. Lost devices can be remotely located and wiped with corporate data being erased on the entire handheld. IT administrators can also reset passwords, and lock corporate profiles. Additionally, Divide has built-in expense management tools to help identify roaming devices and display network operator usage data. Divide is available exclusively for Android phones and tablets but the startup plans to extend the service to iOS and Windows Phone 7 platforms in the future. The app is currently in private beta and will debut soon for download on the Android market. Andrew Toy, CEO of Enterproid, tells me the platform is capitalizing on what he calls the BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) trend. He explains that more and more employees are frustrated by having to carry around two separate smartphones, one for work and one for personal use. Enterproid solves this pain point, makes mobile computing more efficient and gives companies the ability to still maintain a secure mobile environment. Google Ventures partner Rich Miner agrees that Enterproid is the future of enterprise mobile computing. “When you have one smartphone, you don’t want another phone,” he tells us. “Enterproid is leveraging the technologies now offered by these new sets of devices and creating a mangeable wall between enterprise and personal.” Founded by former Morgan Stanley, MTV and Smule execs, Enterproid is working with carriers and manufacturers to develop partnerships, which will be announced soon, says the company. The startup is also releasing an SDK as well. The new round will be used to extend engineering capabilities, expand distribution internationally and launch additional global partnerships.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in 2007, a startup called 8coupons launched as a mobile coupon service that allowed users to sign up with their phone number, receive coupons and offers from local businesses via SMS. That was before Groupon had hit the streets, before the web daily deal model had really taken hold, and 8coupons was just a little ahead of its time on the mobile front. Since then, 8coupons has built out its web property, which today aggregates over 600,000 live offers nationwide from 4,000 sources including 450 daily deal companies as well as 50 local “non-daily” deal companies.  Over the last six months, 8coupons has been phasing out part of its mobile offers to focus more on providing its customers with the best online deals, as 8coupons Co-founder Landy Ung told us that, while merchants were initially excited by the mobile offering, the SMS option proved not to be scalable. The startup has instead recently launched an iPhone app, which users can use to see aggregated local deals and even take advantage of an augmented reality interface to see which businesses are offering deals as they stroll down the street.  With its new focus on becoming an all-in-one platform for deals, 8coupons is now leveraging its relationships with Groupon, LivingSocial and companies like restaurant.com to offer a full array of geo-tagged deals from your local area. Of course, as a web-based daily deal aggregator, 8coupons competes with startups like Yipit and The DealMap, which was recently scooped up by Google. The space, as we all know, is brimming with new daily deal players and aggregators, and as Jason wrote last year, in comparison to sites like Yipit, which offer a clean user interface, 8coupons had some design-related work to do.  To address this ease-of-use issue, 8coupons recently launched a redesign of its site, which has made the web experience cleaner and more intuitive, and includes a refined filtering system to make it easier to search and filter deals, as well as an updated map and list feature that allows users to check out deals in their area, a la DealMap. That being said, to offer a complete service to its users, 8coupons needs to go beyond being just another aggregation and distribution platform, to a full-featured hub that allows visitors to discover, buy, organize, and create daily deals.   To do this, the startup has teamed up with an awesome young startup called CityPockets (you can read our writeup of the NYC-based deal wallet and resale marketplace here) to enable daily deal enthusiasts to track and manage their purchases to boot.  With its CityPockets partnership, 8coupons users can now organize their deals, get reminders when their deals are about to expire, or resell the daily deals they’ve already purchased directly on 8coupons.com. On the flip side, CityPocketers will be able to discover and buy live daily deals from 8coupons’ bullpen of deals from Gilt City, Buywithme, Groupon, etc., right from CityPockets. 8coupons has also recently launched its API, with CityPockets and sites like Topix acting as early adopters and testers.  In terms of monetization, Ung told me that the startup had previously remained profitable through display ads, but its new design notably features fewer display ads, as the startup is transitioning to a straightforward affiliate advertising model. The affiliate model, in which online merchants agree to pay 8coupons in exchange for providing an advertisement and link to the merchant’s site, (most of it is cost per action, Ung says), now comprises over half of the startup’s revenues.  For more, check out 8coupons’ new redesign here and its iPhone app here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Xfire, which operates a social service used by 19 million gamers, has raised $4 million in fresh funding from Intel Capital and unnamed angel investors. As a result of the capital injection, Xfire is severing the ties with Titan Gaming, the company that acquired them from Viacom a little over a year ago. Both Xfire and Titan will henceforth operate independently from one another. In addition to the spin-off and funding news, Xfire has also announced a trio of new execs joining its leadership team; Titan Gaming co-founder Mark Donovan will serve as President, Juston Brommel as CMO and Autumn Radtke as Director of Business Development. Xfire provides a social communication platform targeted specifically at gamers, with features like group text and voice chats and user-generated content sharing tools such as screenshots, videos and live game broadcasts. Newly appointed Xfire President Mark Donovan pitches the service as a sort of “Facebook meets Skype for gamers”. Very meta! Either way, the company says it supports a lively ecosystem that currently comprises ‘hundreds of game publisher partners’ and more than 19 million end users. Intel Capital joins the following early-stage investors in backing Xfire: Tomorrow Ventures, Clearstone Venture Partners principals William Quigley and Jim Armstrong, PriceGrabber co-founder Kamran Pourzanjani, and MP3.com founder Michael Robertson. Donovan tells me Xfire originally received up to a Series C financing round since its founding, followed by an investment of ‘several millions of dollars’ by Viacom during the latter’s ownership of the company. He estimates that roughly $44 million has been injected into the company to date.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Roughly 21 months after successfully launching its vendor-neutral online marketplace for SaaS and cloud-based business applications, GetApp.com has secured $1.1 million from Spanish-American investment firm Nauta Capital to invest in further growth. GetApp.com is essentially a hub for SMB owners to compare, select and purchase SaaS and Web-based applications that can help them manage and grow their business. GetApp.com says it currently reaches some 60,000 businesses on a monthly basis (located primarily in North America and the UK), helping them discover thousands of cloud-based business apps and find the ones that best match their needs and requirements. In total, roughly 1,500 vendors – including the likes of Zoho, NetSuite, Mavenlink and Assistly – have started using the fledgling company’s platform for online leads generation. Available app categories range from CRM to marketing automation solutions, HR and project management tools to accounting and business intelligence applications. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Michael Robertson is no stranger to legal threats from the music industry.  The founder of MP3.com fought a landmark case against Universal Music Group in the 1990s over digital music copyrights, which MP3.com ultimately lost.  He was taken to court again by the music labels a couple years ago as the CEO of MP3Tunes, and now he is raising the ire of the radio industry with his latest startup, DAR.fm.  He just received a cease and desist letter from Univision (embedded below) for making it possible to record 26 of its radio stations. Dar.fm, which stands for Digital Audio Recorder), allows consumers to record Internet radio streams and listen to them later.  “It’s a TiVo for radio,” argues Robertson.  There are 16,000 radio shows from 5,000 different AM and FM radio stations listed on DAR.fm—everything from NPR’s Fresh Air to Rush Limbaugh.  Users can find radio shows on DAR.fm and record them for later playback. But isn’t that the same as rebroadcasting copyrighted content?  Contacted for comment, Robertson writes in an email:  “We don’t believe people recording broadcasts is a copyright infringement—even if done via a cloud service… .  It is not rebroadcasting just like your VCR is not rebroadcasting. It is personal recording. Courts have consistently ruled that personal recording of broadcasts is not a copyright infringement and does not require a license. This is why consumers can have and use a Tivo/DVR. DAR.fm is simply the identical service for radio.” Univision’s lawyers don’t see it that way.  In its letter, they write: “we disagree with your characterization that your website allows users to record audio content in the same way that a DVR allows recording of audiovisual content for purposes of time-shifting.’  What Univision takes particular issue with is a new feature DAR.fm launched about a month ago, which lets users download their recordings from Dar.fm to their mobile devices, including iPhones, iPads, Android phones, and Blackberries.  “Clearly, you should know that by enabling subscribers to download their recordings as MP3 files, your website is essentially opening the door for users to engage in copyright infringement, since unlimited copies can be made from downloaded MP3 files and then distributed to others.”  Univision is demanding that all of its radio stations be removed from DAR.fm’s listings and blocked from being added to user’s personalized station playlists. Just as with MP3.com, which got in trouble for copying songs on its servers, the issue here seems to be the ability for user’s to copy and download recordings of the broadcasts to their own devices.  But this is a murky legal area because if it is legal for people to record radio shows to their own devices, why shouldn’t that protection extend to the cloud?  And vice versa, if they keep a personal recording in the cloud, why shouldn’t they be able to download that to a device as an MP3.  If they then go ahead and rebroadcast that recording, then the copyright laws would kick in, but DAR.fm does not allow for rebroadcast via its service. “DAR.fm is bringing radio into the 21st century, by giving it the same capabilities that TV broadcasting has: time shifting, interactivity and portability,” argues Robertson.   “The last decade is proof that time shifting TV was a great boon to the TVindustry. People watch 40% more TV now than 10 years ago and much of that credit is due to the DVR. Would anyone even know or watch Pawn Stars on the History Channel without a DVR?”  Well, he does have a point about Pawn Stars. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier today, I wrote about a new startup called Perka that’s attempting to bring an end to loyalty cards with a kick ass merchant-facing service. Well, it seems that today is the day for launching loyalty program-disrupting startups, as a company named Perkville is coming out stealth mode and launching into the public sphere. Many of us have overflowing wallets due the amount of loyalty cards, buy-five-get-one-free tickets, and Groupons we carry around in our wallet. Or we get to our favorite coffee shop only to remember that we forgot our punch card at home. Perkville, as opposed to Perka, is taking a different approach to providing local merchants with a loyalty solution by turning customers’ email addresses into virtual reward cards. That means no more cards to carry and forget at home, no apps to download — just an email address, and users can participate in any merchant program on Perkville. And for merchants, Perkville is free to use and can be set up in minutes. So how does it work? Merchants decide on what kind of reward program they want to establish for their customers, whether it be per visit or purchase, etc. When customers make a purchase, merchants reward customers with points via an in-store tablet (i.e. iPad) or their point of sale (POS) system. Customers can then track their points online and refer friends to the merchant, who then receive a special deal in return. The referring customer then receives points for a successful referral.  Founded in early January of last year by former Senior Product Manager at LinkedIn and Yahoo! Sunil Saha and Eric Bollman, the former Director of UX at Yahoo!, Perkville has been working diligently in stealth to partner with POS software providers to scale the business and get it to a place where it can become a valuable service for merchants. At launch, the startup has already attracted 200+ active merchants across the U.S. and has 100K+ consumers on board, 25 percent of which are registered users. Whether merchants are onboarding with Perkville through POS visual touch solutions like Mindbody, which provides business management software for a wide range of businesses, including salons, spas, fitness studios, yoga, martial arts and retail, or by encouraging iPad adoption at the POS (which the team says work well for places like coffee shops, for cashiers who don’t feel comfortable with complicated approaches), or whether the merchants are entering the customer’s email address manually, once they have the email, the rest of the Perkville process remains the same. The user then gets an invite to join, they register, and the rest is history. The Perkville Co-founders told me that they’ve been seeing low adoption among merchants using mobile solutions, QR code solutions, Shopkick, etc., because they all require downloading an app, scanning, holding a card next to some wonky device — and that this type of friction leads to concern, skepticism, and hesitation from small, local merchants. For companies like Groupon that have large sales forces, or for companies that don’t have such an automated process, there’s a lot of marketing spend and going door-to-door for these types of deals and loyalty solutions, and it can be tough to scale. Perkville doesn’t have to worry about that.  Another cool thing about Perkville is in how it’s monetizing. Because its core platform is free for merchants, Perkville is offering merchants the ability to set perpetual deals, or “winback” deals, for example, that lets merchants identify customers who haven’t been back to the store in awhile and send them a deal to get them back and buying. For Perkville’s highly targeted deals, the startup takes a 30 percent cut of profits earned by merchants. But, on the whole, merchants retain full flexibility control and its loyalty program runs in the background — merchants can do as much or as little as they want to once Perkville is set up.  To test its new email-based loyalty hypothesis, Perkville established a case study with a yoga studio, and the results they’re seeing are impressive. Of the 9,000 people using Charm City Yoga, 21 percent of those students have joined the loyalty rewards program. These students are taking an average of 70 percent more classes. And since Perkville gives consumers the option of connecting their programs to Facebook and Twitter, the yoga studio has seen 500 postings and 100 tweets, as well as 77 referrals taking an additional 340 more classes. Their “Winback” program has reactivated 150 customers.  Perkville is currently actively seeking outside investment, after a $500K raise from friends and family and a year-plus of bootstrapping. It’s an interesting idea to be sure, and their email-based loyalty program seems to proving itself in case studies.  Check Perkville out at home here and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily PowerInbox, the new email platform that lets you run apps for Facebook, Twitter, Groupon and Google+ inside your inbox, just closed an additional $800, 000 in seed funding, bringing its total Series Seed to $1.9 million. The company had previously raised $1.1 million in August, mostly from AngelList investors. Today, PowerInbox’s investors include Atlas Venture, Longworth Venture Partners, Correlation Ventures, Egan Managed Capital, Founder Collective, Cloud Capital Partners, Ecosystem Ventures and angels Christopher Lynch, Michael Mark, Praveen Gollapudi, Ted Chan, Alan Phillips, Mike Dornbrook, Peter Bordes, Russ Wilcox, Mark Rose, Eric Scott, Ed Chalfin, Eric Groves, Greg Cangialosi, Leslie Murdock, Philipp Stauffer, Joe Caruso, Mike Santullo, Dan Peterson, Jerril Jacob, Tim Barton and others. The company plans to use its additional funding to further expand the platform and hire engineers. For those unfamiliar with Powerinbox, it’s one of the most practical applications I’ve come across in recent months. The service runs on top of your email platform (Gmail, Yahoo, Hotmail, and soon, Outlook) by augmenting the messages sent to you by various services, essentially turning your emails into apps. You can follow, message, and @reply Twitter users, like and reply to Facebook posts, add users to Google+ Circles, keep track of the time left to grab a Groupon and more, all from within the email message itself.  After we reported on PowerInbox’s addition of Google+ functionality in September, CEO Matt Thazhmon said the service’s usage jumped by 50% and  has remained at that number ever since. Users have told PowerInbox (via this survey, still active) they want to see LinkedIn added next, but there isn’t an API available that would allow PowerInbox to properly leverage that service. Other apps on the startup’s radar include YouTube, Dropbox, Flickr, PayPal, Netflix and more. Looks like email was dying for a breath of fresh air, hmm? Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInHeiferman’s Advice to FoundersAs Chris Dixon’s conversation with Meetup co-founder, Scott Heiferman wraps, Dixon asks Heiferman what advice he has for entrepreneurs? Heiferman responds by saying that having passion for your project is key and adds “avoid thinking you have to do it all.” For example he mentions launching Meetup with a finance co-founder. He tells Dixon, “it’s been the greatest thing in the world” because each founder focuses on their strengths. He continues, as founders “your job is to make something awesome that people will thank you for and to divide and conquer and build a team that is going do everything needed to make it work.” Dixon agrees and adds “self awareness of your weaknesses” is critical for success. Heiferman concludes by stating the key role founders can play in shaping the future. “Reinventing and revitalizing this country and every country is really just going to be about how entrepreneurs and people are building companies that are built to be great companies, not built to sell and sell up to big ugly companies that will screw it up.” Check out the video for additional insights and make sure to watch episodes I and II of this interview. Past episodes of Founder Stories which include interviews with Christopher Poole, David Karp and Fred Wilson are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily General Motors is partnering with a car-sharing startup called RelayRides on a new venture that will allow GM owners to rent out their idle vehicles via the OnStar service and their mobile phone. The program will launch first in California in 2012, before expanding to other markets. RelayRides, a peer-to-peer car-sharing marketplace lets auto owners choose to rent out their car when they’re not using it, with the car’s owner controlling the rate and availability through the online service. It’s different from other car-sharing networks like ZipCar, for example, as it doesn’t have its own fleet – all sharing is peer-to-peer. And unlike former TechCrunch Disrupt winner Getaround, the company sends out its own reps to install the device in your vehicles. Now, with the new GM partnership, RelayRides will be able to leverage the built-in OnStar service to unlock the doors, control the engine and track the car. Chevrolets, Buicks, GMC and Cadillacs are all supported. RelayRides takes 15% of the list price for itself, 20% for its $1 million insurance policy and the remaining 65% goes to the vehicle owner. If the borrower ever wrecks the car, RelayRides handles the insurance claim and your personal policy isn’t affected. Drivers are also vetted first, to verify their driving records are up to par. RelayRides was founded in June 2010. The company currently operates in San Francisco and Boston. It plans to rollout to additional markets based on consumer demand.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Tagtile is a new company (and recent TechCrunch Disrupt Startup Alley participant), which is using the Square model involving free hardware to address the issues surrounding customer loyalty, management and rewards for brick-and-mortar merchants. Like mobile payments service Square, which uses a free hardware dongle that attaches to a mobile phone, Tagtile also provides its merchants with a free hardware device – in this case, a white cube for customers to tap with their phone at checkout. The cube is meant to serve as a stopgap solution until NFC (near field communication) really takes off in mobile. “In spite of all its promise,” explains Tagtile Co-founder and CEO Abheek Anand, “NFC has always been a technology that’s 3 years away…We want to focus on only one thing – changing consumer behavior.” (Devices in stores – this is a thing now! See also: the iPod-based Perka, launched today).  What Tagtile provides is a simple way for customers to register their visit to a participating merchant, in exchange for points, coupons, discounts or whatever other loyalty rewards the merchant wants to distribute. The customer simply launches an app on their smartphone (iPhone or Android, BlackBerry soon) and taps the cube at checkout to get the rewards. They can also check-in on Foursquare or Facebook via the app, or (soon) tweet about their visit. The experience is very much like what an NFC-enabled solution would provide – it just doesn’t use NFC. Instead Tagtile leverages sensors common to mobile phones today to make the connection, but Anand doesn’t want to publicly discuss which sensors or how Tagtile is using them. On the merchant side, the cube either plugs into a PC via USB to integrate with any existing point-of-sale system offering an SDK (software development kit). For those merchants without the USB option, Tagtile can plug directly into a wall outlet. In that case, the cube borrows the data connection on the user’s smartphone to send data back to Tagtile servers. For consumers with privacy concerns, Tagtile is clear in that personally identifiable isn’t shared with merchants, only with Tagtile itself. Focused on the security of that data is Tagtile’s other founder, Soham Mazumdar, who spent six years at Google working on infrastructure and data mining for Google Search. Meanwhile, Anand previously worked in Product Management at Engine Yard, as an investor at Lightspeed Venture Partners, and as an early engineer at VMware. Tagtile merchants can go beyond the basic “punch card” rewards system with service, getting access to something that’s more akin to a “Google analytics” for their store. Who shopped there, how often, when, etc. is displayed in a dashboard-like interface. Merchants can also narrowly target customers via campaigns – e.g. “everyone who hasn’t been back to the store in the past 2 months.” Tagtile serves as the middleman, delivering the message from the merchant to the shopper. Currently, the company has 35 merchants across different verticals testing the service in San Francisco, New York, Florida, and the Maryland/New Jersey area. Tagtile is a few weeks away from closing its first seed round, expected at around $1 million. The round may also coincide with its public launch, also a month out. In the meantime, interested merchants can sign up here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily ReportGrid, a recent graduate form the 2011 TechStars Boulder class has just raised a seed round in the amount of $750,000. The company, a data analytics as a service offering, is notable for powering its API for analytics and reporting through a cloud-scalable database and visualization engine. Principal investors in the round included Launch Capital, David Cohen, Walt Winshall, Doug Derwin, and Ed Roman. The service is designed to be a turnkey, hosted alternative to building and maintaining home-grown analytics solutions, like those that run on top of open source technologies like Hadoop. The “magic” to ReportGrid’s offering is in the simplicity of the API it provides, which is RESTful and supports JSON. (ProgrammableWeb did a deep dive into the API back in May if you’re interested in learning more.) The API also plugs into a SaaS vendor’s product, allowing visualizations and analytics to become part of their product’s offering to customers. Currently, ReportGrid is powering analytics for a range of customers, including SnapEngage and Fidatto. Headquartered in Boulder, Colorado, ReportGrid’s advisors include Jim Franklin (SendGrid), Ari Newman (Jive Software), Bill Boebel (Rackspace), and Doug Derwin (Taylor & Company IP Law). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cooliris’ photo-sharing app LiveShare is all-new today, with two major additions: a Facebook-like News Feed and enhanced geolocation features that let you share photos with others in your same vicinity. The latter feature, seemingly reminiscent of the failed location-based photo-sharing app from Color, is different in that it doesn’t just work on mobile – it works in a Web browser, too. For those unfamiliar with LiveShare (not surprising, given the crowded photo-sharing space), it’s trying differentiate itself by being an app you can choose to use, but that doesn’t require everyone else in your network to use in order to be effective. It’s a photo-sharing tool, in other words, but doesn’t necessarily have to be your photo-sharing social network. This, frankly, has been one of LiveShare’s best qualities. There are far too many apps that require a “network effect” to function properly. It’s a breath of fresh air to find one where that’s just an added bonus. When you post photos in LiveShare, to either a public or private group, you can share those pics out via email or SMS or cross-post them to Facebook and Twitter. It also offers dynamically generated suggestions of folks to add to a group’s list during its creation, including those who you only share with over email or text messaging, for example. Coming soon, if a friend replies via SMS or email, that message will be added to the LiveShare group, too, making it a one-stop shop for everything that’s going on with your photos. Today’s addition of the News Feed inches LiveShare back into “photo social networking” territory, however, bringing the focus back to the in-app groups. Like Facebook’s News Feed, you can comment on the posts and those comments are syndicated back to Facebook. Unfortunately, LiveShare says that comments on Facebook won’t be synced back to the in-app group. There’s a reason for this (they claim it would be “too confusing”), but from my perspective, it feels like a mistake. After all, in every other capacity, LiveShare is helping to centralize the photo-sharing experience. The other new feature, location-based public groups, lets anyone contribute to a photo collection, and works especially well for real-time events, like parties, weddings, or nights out on the town. For those who don’t have the app, they can email in photos to a main address instead or post online. Photos are then available for later viewing both in the app and on the Web. The new LiveShare app goes live on both Android and iPhone today, at 10 AM EST. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Keek, a Toronto-based startup, has secured $5.5 million in financing from a consortium of investors led by AlphaNorth Asset Management and Plazacorp Ventures, with merchant bank PowerOne Capital Markets acting as agents.  Keek essentially wants to become the Twitter for video-based status updates, a free social networking platform where users go to post, share and interact with ‘microvideos’. Keek lets people post video updates via webcam or mobile apps. The service is integrated with the likes of Facebook, Twitter and Tumblr to enable swift and easy sharing of video messages. A Keek video can run up to 36 seconds in length. Perhaps the time is right now, but it’s clear that the few microvideo startups that have sprung up over the years have struggled to make waves. I remember when Seesmic tried to become the Twitter of video before they mothballed that idea and moved on to other things (a couple of times over), and 12seconds was also forced to call it quits after a few year of operations. Another one that launched recently is Tout, by the way. It’s safe to say Keek and Tout will have a challenging time succeeding where Seesmic and 12seconds have faltered, but then again when was building a business every easy? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Perka, a startup coming out of stealth and launching into the public today, wants to offer merchants a new spin on loyalty rewards programs in an effort to become the “antidote” to the 300-plus daily deal sites out there cannibalizing each other’s revenues and user bases. Perka is essentially bringing those “buy 10, get 1 free” punch cards we know and love online — and to our mobile devices. And, rather than just being another consumer-facing loyalty offering, the startup is looking to flip the deck and instead go after small, local businesses, as it looks to enable these merchants to effectively compete with the sophisticated loyalty programs of multibillion dollar companies like Starbucks and American Airlines, to name a few notable loyalty players. With Groupon, LivingSocial and the daily deals model, merchants are already offering a product or a service for less, but Perka wants to put a device in a merchant’s local store, providing an app for both customers and merchants to allows merchants to easily track purchases, and get to know and reward their loyal customers. On the other side, consumers get the benefit of being able to easily checkin to Perka on their mobile device from the store, or via SMS from any phone, to earn stamps in pursuit of rewards. Perka is hoping that by offering a simple solution and working individually, face-to-face with small local businesses, they will be able to convince merchants that Perka offers a better way to get at that much-coveted retention — to keep customers coming back.  Through Perka, merchants can decide what they want to give away, how much, and how many checkins (or stamps) it will take for customers to receive rewards. When a customer comes into a store and checks in via their iPhone or Android app, using their Perka-enabled device (at this point an iPod Touch), merchants can see who their customers are, and that they are, say, $2.50 away from the $25 goal. The merchant can address the customer by name and tell them that with another small purchase they can get a free coffee or a coupon for a free massage. For merchants, Perka will cost $85 by way of a monthly subscription, which includes the addition of a Perka iPod at their cash register to validate customer purchases. Transactions are recorded in a centralized database, and a single registration allows members to participate in any Perka merchant program.  The startup also will work with individual businesses to tailor their loyalty program to whatever suits their current needs, whether that’s to encourage repeat visits, improve sales of a particular product, or increase transactions. Merchants can run multiple programs through Perka, and include rewards for multiple products or services at once. What’s more, local businesses can sign up for free consultation with the Perka team to see if the service is right for them and how to best meet their goals, as well as apply for “Perka Pros” — on-site account managers who consult with merchant owners and managers, provide in-store marketing materials, design custom incentive programs and monitor results. Perka is launching its service in Portland, where the startup is based, to begin with and has already partnered with 30 partners in the Portland area. Over the next year, Perka’s team of 16 will roll out its services in another 20 cities and regions across the country.  The startup is co-founded by Alan Chung, Rob Coury and Rob Bethge, all three serial entrepreneurs who count six exits between them ranging from $25 million to $1.5 billion, with buyers including Facebook (Zenbe), Aol, Sun Microsystems, and TD Ameritrade. The startup is currently bootstrapping, but has also recently begun talks on Sand Hill Road for its first round of venture investment, Chung told TechCrunch.  The key value proposition here for Perka, in the long term, is its centralized database that tracks real customer purchases. Currently, there are many consumer web companies collective massive amounts of data on consumer activity, checkins, purchases, spending trends, and so on, but few companies have been able to easily tap into the actual real world, offline buying habits of average people at small, local merchants. This data can become an invaluable resource for local businesses looking to get to know their consumers better — just as it can be a highly leverage-able asset for Perka. For the startup to succeed, it’s all about providing a seamless setup and onboarding process for local merchants. From what I’ve seen, the process is just that. And because Perka only requires a few merchants to adopt the service (and sign up their own customers) to be able to create a useful network for local customers and participating merchants, it may just have a leg up on other services targeting local merchants, like Foursquare. And, hey, ePunchcard company Punchd was recently acquired by Google for $10 million. In terms of the mountain a loyalty program-focused startup has to climb, sure, only 12 to 15 percent of customers are loyal to a single retailer. But then again, that relatively small percentage of customers drives 55 to 75 percent of sales, according to Chung, so by reducing customer attrition by just 5 percent, a company can improve its bottom line significantly. Increasing that customer loyalty by just 1 percent equivalent to reducing costs by 10 percent, he said — something that will surely be of interest to local business owners. For more on Perka, check them out at home here or on the App Store here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInHeiferman’s Views on Facebook and SingularityEpisode I of Chris Dixon’s Founder Stories interview with Scott Heiferman‘s concluded with Heiferman giving Dixon some of his thoughts on the future of social media. In this episode, Dixon, who is a light Facebook user, seems mildly surprised that Heiferman is a Facebook fan—mentioning privacy as one reason why. Heiferman tells Dixon Facebook makes “great product (Dixon agrees)  … it’s an elegant beautiful product and what else matters?” He then adds, “I don’t trust people in our industry who don’t use Facebook” saying “it’s the soul of how hundreds of millions of people are really experiencing their first time of participating online.” However, as the two round out their conversation Heiferman also expresses doubts that Facebook will maintain its dominance indefinitely. Their discussion weaves into the topic of the singularity. Heiferman suggests that “the real singularity is when everyone on the planet has a phone and is connected and is on Facebook or however that social networking happens, and what gets unleashed when that happens, we can’t even imagine.” In the video below, Dixon switches topics and inquires about Meetup’s origins. Heiferman tells Dixon after 9/11 he read Bowling Alone and was inspired to find a way for people to connect and trust one another. Living in what he calls “a coarser, nastier world” Heiferman says Meetup is designed to show folks that “there are people in your neighborhood who would be really damn helpful to you” so “you all should meet up and meet up regularly and a community can emerge.” Watch both videos for additional insights, along with episode I of Heiferman’s interview. Past episodes of Founder Stories including interviews with Dustin Moskovitz, Kevin Ryan, Christopher Poole and Dennis Crowley are here. Episode III is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – While YouTube is reportedly paving the way for a major content push in collaboration with studios and networks, its not-so-small competitor Dailymotion isn’t sitting still either. The company has inked a deal with AnyClip to brings thousands of full-length feature films and 50,000 fully license movie clips to its popular video sharing platform. AnyClip works with studios like Universal and Vivendi, with more deals coming soon, to gain access to full-length films rather than only promotional material, unlike competitor MovieClips. Focused on a B2B model, AnyClip works together with distribution partners to fill their websites with licensed clips.  AnyClip’s proprietary tagging tech extracts and indexes over 5,000 individual pieces of metadata from full-length feature films (including actors, objects, characters and places) and is even able to understand the mood and emotional tone of given scenes, the company says. Enter Dailymotion, which welcomes some 114 million unique visitors and generates over 1.2 billion video views every month, according to comScore. Starting today, Dailymotion users will gain access to AnyClip’s library of over 50,000 clips, from major movie studios such as Universal Pictures, Vivendi Entertainment and several indie distribution firms. To get a taste of what they have to offer, check out their list of most popular clips.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cloudbot, the developers of a mobile and web app that aggregates users’ online presence into a single interface, has raised new funding from Lightbank. We heard the total round is just under $1 million. Draper Associates and Hyde Park Angels also participated in the round. Cloudbot helps manage any cloud-based profiles, contacts, applications and activities that users maintain across the web. The application specifically brings together services like Facebook, Twitter, Gmail, LinkedIn, and more into a single user interface. Its universal address book and integrated social connections, makes it easy to call, email, send a Facebook or LinkedIn message, post a Tweet, share a document via DropBox or GoogleDocs, schedule a meeting, and more. The startup, which is part of AngelPad’s incubator, aims to be one app (both mobile and web) that allows you to manage and interact with many other apps and services.  So you can enter in “call Sam” and it will call the friend’s name you entered. Or you might enter “gram Sam” and it will show you the Instagram photos from that person. If you type “eat with Sam”, the app will look at your location and the location for Sam and find a good place near both of you. In total, Cloudbot is integrated with 24 apps/services.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Singapore-headquartered mobile media and advertising startup Affle has raised over $10 million from D2 COMMUNICATIONS (D2C), Japan’s largest mobile advertising company and a subsidiary of the country’s largest mobile operator, NTT DoCoMo, in joint venture with DENTSU.  D2C joins Microsoft, Itochu, Bennett Coleman & Company and Centurion Private Equity as investors in Affle. Affle products include communication apps Pinch and SMS2.0, and mobile couponing service Coufon, among others. Affle and D2C had entered a strategic partnership earlier this year, and the companies state that this follow-up investment round strengthens their association further. D2C is the largest mobile advertising agency in Japan, with rights to sell all inventories on NTT DoCoMo, Japan’s biggest mobile carrier with over 57 million subscribers. The new capital will be used for consolidation of product development efforts and boosting Affle’s business in existing Asian markets, as well as launching in new markets. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Touch devices have revolutionized mobile gaming, just like they’ve revolutionized the mobile space as a whole. For mobile games, they’ve introduced some amazing interfaces and controllers that make those that have had the fortune of playing Atari on console take a step back and pinch themselves. Of course, technology is now taking us toward a confluence of consoles and touch devices. Today, companies like Joypad Inc. are turning our iPhones into game controllers. Joypad’s eponymous free app syncs directly with iPad, Mac, and PC games over bluetooth or WiFi to let gamers use their smartphone as a controller to play their favorite games on various NES-style control pads. Game developers can also use Joypad’s free SDKs, which take about 30 minutes to integrate, to add Joypad support to their games. With these SDKs, gamers can interact with their favorite games in ways that were before impossible. For example, as a gamer reaches a new level, or unlocks new features, developers can push a new button out to the player in realtime. This kind of functionality gives developers a new way to create custom layouts for controllers and forge a deeper integration with the playing experience.  Joypad started as a way to control a Mac NES emulator from your iPhone. Since launching in March, the product evolved per customer feedback — with support for additional emulators, multiplayer, and Windows. Despite positive feedback from early customers, setup was too confusing for a mainstream product, Joypad Co-founder Lou Zell tells me, and so the team released its first developer SDK in July as a way to eliminate all end-user setup. Now it “just works”, he says.   Another reason to love Joypad is that the team consists solely of its two founders: Todd Hamilton and Lou Zell. Joypad is the co-founders’ third startup, all of which have been self-funded between stints of contract work to pay off credit card debt. And the release of their SDK, along with the elimination of all end-user setup has worked. The founders have seen early traction with Joypad that far outpaces their previous startups, with 50,000 downloads of their iOS app, and 15 companies using their SDK to date. It seems that the third time just may be the charm. As a result of this early success, the team is raising a small seed round while they continue to build out their products. Today, the Joypad team is also bringing their Unity SDK out of alpha, which means more high quality Mac and iOS games can now offer Joypad support — in addition to the 12 games already live.  Another cool part of this is that, now that Joypad has SDKs available for Mac, iOS, and Unity iOS, their new capabilities will allow gamers to play iOS games on their Apple TV via their iPhones and iPads. If you’re an Apple device freak, this will put you in heaven, especially ahead of the expected launch of iOS 5 tomorrow.  Thanks to Airplay, Joypad will allow you to wirelessly move the games you’re playing on your iPad to Apple TV, enabling you to take over the world from your bean bag chair. Joypad’s SDKs can be integrated into any iOS games available on the App Store, and with a little bit of tinkering, developers can make their games Joypad and Apple TV compatible. While Joypad offers a great array of controller options and makes it easy for developers to give their games wireless iPhone controls, the startup isn’t the only one in the space. In June, we wrote about Brass Monkey’s acquisition of Emotely, which brought together Brass Monkey’s fully developed controller-building SDK, with support for Flash, Unity3D, and desktop games and apps, with Emotely’s ability to build controllers using HTML5 for both the interface and communication layer (with HTTP and WebSockets) — a match made in heaven. Together Brass Monkey and Joypad offer some great options for gamers looking to add that extra level to their home gaming experience. As developers clue into these solutions and adoption grows, Joypad’s catalog of games for the iPad will expand, and we may just have a game changer on our hands. For more on Joypad, check it out on the App Store here or find the startup’s SDKs here. Below you’ll find an example of the types of games Joypad is now targeting with the Unity SDK:  And for the Apple TV hack, check ‘er out on the YouTubes here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Launching at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco last month was a startup called HouseFix. As you might be able to guess by its name, HouseFix is a startup and service that aims to help you find the right people to fix up your house. Started by homeowners and contractors, the startup is trying to make the process of finding skilled labor for home repairs better for both parties. To do this, HouseFix wants to give homeowners a CARFAX report for their house — a complete history of facts about their house that includes a list of improvement projects or anything that future homeowners would find relevant.  To differentiate itself from other providers like Angie’s List or ServiceMagic, HouseFix is bringing social and local contexts to homeowners in a simple and intuitive way, so that they can quickly identify local contractors that fit their personal criteria for what kind of labor they’re looking for, pricing, etc. The startup wants you to be able to find contractors you can trust in a matter of minutes, not days or weeks.  HouseFix is thus hoping to become a comprehensive directory of contractors, complete with reviews and profiles of each, that can be easily searched by homeowners. Users will be able to see which of their neighbors are using the site, which contractors they’ve recently used, and beyond social recommendations, to help homeowners wade through the noise, HouseFix takes a range of different factors, including performance, reliability, etc. to generate. a score for each contractor — like a credit score — so that owners know who they can trust. (You can read Jason’s previous coverage of HouseFix here.) And on the flip side, HouseFix wants to be a resource for these contractors as well, providing them with platform on which they can keep track of their own projects and bring their offline business online. With HouseFix, contractors can manage their jobs, viewing which jobs are on time and within the quoted budget, store notes and before and after photos, and finally allowing them to build an online profile that they can use to create and manage their own web presence. In comparison to ServiceMagic, which charges contractors for the list of contractors homeowners receive, HouseFix is currently free in beta, and doesn’t charge. ServiceMagic serves homeowners with suggestions — three phone numbers — but there’s very little information on the contractors provided.  HouseFix President and CEO Adrian Talapan says that, as a homeowner, one wants to find a contractor that has worked on a house similar to theirs, in their neighborhood, and has worked on projects similar to what they’re looking for and has done great work.  For contractors, generally speaking, they end up being the ninth or tenth service provider to contact a homeowner about their job request, and by that point, the homeowner isn’t taking calls or has already found the person they want to use. This makes it a waste of time for contractors, and few services give them the opportunity to effectively sell themselves and share the kind of work they do best to find the right jobs. On stage at Disrupt, HouseFix was the victim of some technical difficulties, and the startup did not have the opportunity to share their entire presentation. So, without further ado, here is video of that explains in depth what HouseFix is all about, and its value proposition for homeowners and contractors alike:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily BranchOut, a professional social network for Facebook, is announcing a partnership with jobs and resume site CareerBuilder to help users bring social networking into the job search experience. Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. Launched in July 2010, BranchOut is sort of like a LinkedIn for Facebook because it allows you to network and find jobs through your friends on the social network. BranchOut’s Facebook app lets you search for companies and then shows you all your friends who either work there or know somebody who does. The application basically unlocks the massive amounts of career data about your social graph on the world’s largest social network. On average, BranchOut, which is backed by Accel, Norwest, Floodgate, and Redpoint, says a network of 300 Facebook friends translates to 30,000 professional connections. Recruiters, in turn, use BranchOut to promote jobs and source talent from a variety of employment sectors. Via the partnership, job seekers on CareerBuilder can view jobs of interest and instantly see people in their expanded network, via BranchOut’s application, who they could contact for a potential referral or advice on getting an interview. The companies say that the integration of BranchOut’s Facebook-focused technology is a perfect fit for job seekers. According to a 2011 CareerBuilder study in the U.S., 40 percent of workers who are looking for jobs said they research companies that interest them on Facebook before applying to a position; and one-in-five (21 percent) use Facebook to contact friends about job opportunities. And other traditional online job platforms are definitely catching on this social trend when it comes to networking and job search. Fellow job search portal Monster recently recently launched a BranchOut-clone called BeKnown. The question is when LinkedIn will eventually  integrate Facebook into its professional social network. Latest headlines delivered to you daily New direct-deal advertising marketplace Chartboost launches today, allowing mobile game developers to use cross-promotion techniques to increase the size of their game’s user base, and therefore, its revenues. The company was created by former Tapulous employees, Maria Alegre, now Chartboost CEO, and Sean Fannan, CTO. After Disney’s acquisition of Tapulous, the Chartboost founders decided to help start a platform to give other game publishers the same ability to maximize their distribution power, something that they felt was Tapulous’ most valuable asset. Previously Alegre worked a business and revenue associate at Tapulous. She later became head of Tapulous Labs Studio under Disney, where she was responsible for monetization and launch strategies, project management and game design. Fannan was a senior software engineer at Tapulous, where he built and managed the original server architecture, helped with scaling and coordinated the engineering of marketing deals with brands like Microsoft, Groupon, Disney and Fox. Chartboost is not an ad network, the company explains, it’s a technology platform. It provides free ad-serving technology for direct deals and cross-promotions via the Chartboost SDK. Instead of mediating direct-deals through an ad network, Chartboost publishers get a 100% revenue share on these deals.  Included in the platform are white-labeled fullscreen interstitials, which publishers can use to promote their other titles. When they’re not being used internally, those spaces can be sold directly to other publishers and used to generate revenue. Also, says Chartboost, because the interstitials are promoting recommended games, they’re not perceived by end users as if they were ads. Chartboost also offers in-depth metrics that allow publishers to track the direct deals and cross-promotions and manage their inventory accordingly. The analytics show impressions, clicks, installs, CPC, CPI and eCPM for each app. An API to track UDIDs is available, too.  The company currently operates under a freemium model: the ad-server technology is free when used for direct deals or internal cross-promotion. Meanwhile, the opt-in ad network offers revenue sharing with publishers, allowing them to maximize the unsold inventory that’s not used internally for cross-promotion or in direct deals. Those campaigns use metrics like Cost per Click (CPC) or Cost per Install (CPI) to determine pricing. At launch, notable Chartboost publishers include TinyCo, Storm8, Pocket Gems, Gameview Studios, The Playforge, Funzio, OMGPOP, Com2us, Fluik Entertainment, Sunstorm Interactive, Ace Viral, Camigo Media, Neon Play, Lakoo, and Devsisters. Several of these are leading publishers in their own markets, and many are top 100 app makers. As of August 31st, self-funded Chartboost says it’s a profitable company. The platform is live on iOS and will launch on Android soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Axcient, the hybrid cloud-based data backup, disaster recovery, and business continuity startup, is today announcing that it has closed a $15.5 million round of series C funding. The round was led by Scale Venture Partners, the VC firm that has led investments in other cloud services companies like Box.net and DocuSign, with participation from previous investors like Allegis Capital, Peninsula Ventures, and Thomvest Ventures.  The series C investment brings Axcient’s total funding to $33.5 million, and SaaS veteran and Scale Ventures Managing Director Rory O’Driscoll will be joining the startup’s board of directors as part of the investment. O’Driscoll also sits on the boards of companies like JasperSoft, Lumension Security, mBlox, Omniture, Picolight, ScanSafe and Vantage Media. The company will be using its latest infusion of capital to triple the size of its marketing and sales team, roll out its services internationally, and grow its staff of 80 to 120+ over the next six months. Today, small businesses looking to protect, back up, and optimize their most valuable asset, their data, often have to work with three or four different hardware and software solutions, combining services like Symantec BackupExec with tape or NAS or other online backup services and local hardware solutions. Cobbling these different solutions together to achieve maximum protection, backup, deduplication, and disaster recovery is a pain in the ass. Especially for how fundamental these services are to small businesses. One day without email or access to core parts of their network can be crippling to a young startup. Founded in 2006, the Mountain View-based startup is attempting to bring these core data protection and recovery solutions to SMBs — for a reasonable price. And while it’s still paving its road ahead in a crowded space, the startup is beginning to see some real traction. Today, 2,000 SMBs are using Axcient to protect their data, from small dental practices and sole-practitioner law firms to 4,000-employee, multi-location AV companies and VCs on Sand Hill Road. The startup has seen over 30 percent quarter-over-quarter monthly recurring revenue growth in 2011 and by the end of this year will be managing two billion customer files and over 100,000 customer laptops and servers.  This year, the startup has also added 1,000 partners in North America, including a strategic partnership with HP, as well as adding enhancements to its platform, including remote monitoring and management platforms and professional service automation tools.  Like Nimble Storage, which we wrote about back in July, for example, Axcient is attempting to make it appallingly easy for SMBs, which may not be able to afford IT teams or install a hive of servers, to combine storage, backup and disaster-recovery into a single solution. To do so, Axcient sends businesses a small device (typically about the size of a desktop hard drive), which they can set up in as little as 5 minutes and self-connects to Axcient’s cloud as well as the SMB’s network or Amazon hosting service. With local, on-site hardware that can effectively use local network speeds with the added benefit of the creation of a secure tunnel to Axcient’s cloud, the startup has basically enabled SMBs to take advantage of a SaaS-based hybrid cloud model which works for companies with 250GBs of data or 20 terabytes. And the cost to the end user is $100 a month, with pricing going up somewhat for customers with larger data needs. Pretty affordable considering. Axcient’s value proposition, then, is clear: For a relatively affordable price, the startup offers an all-in-one solution that supports all of your company’s different OSes, like Windows, Mac OSX, and Linux, as well support for its critical applications, like Exchange Server, SQL server — on all your different devices, like laptops, desktops, servers, etc, providing that mission critical business continuity.  And it runs in the background of your system and can be accessed remotely — via your browser.  For more on Axcient’s offerings, click here and let us know how you think Axcient fares compared to the competition. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For those unfamiliar with ad retargeting, it’s helpful to think of the mall scene from Minority Report, in which personalized advertisements follow John Anderton around as he walks. In this scifi scene, the targeting happens via retinal scan, but in 2011, luckily Big Brother has not quite taken over. Retargeting in online advertising today allows businesses to show ads to visitors who leave their websites without conversion — generally by way of cookie tracking.  It’s a bit creepy, as brand-vertisements can seem to follow us around the Web as we surf, as retargeted ads are basically displayed to people who have shown at least some idle interest in engaging with the advertiser’s brand, but have yet to turn themselves into a juicy conversion. (The majority of web traffic, by the way.) Retargeter, which, at retargeter.com has landed one of the best domains in the space, allows companies to serve their ads to their audience after they leave their website without converting. It works to provide a simple retargeting solution that enables businesses to place one line of code on their websites and begin serving their ads to would-be customers across sites like Yahoo, YouTube, and the New York Times. And today the company is looking to expand its offerings beyond the typical retargeting solutions by giving companies further access to that much-coveted feature: Social. Launching ReTargeter Social today, the company is combining three of its retargeting products (RTInfluencer, RTDiscover, and RTInteractive) into one solution to allow brands to target their most zealous online advocates, increase their network reach via social media, and increase conversions by “up to 50 percent”, as targeted social users are “4 times more likely to click on shared links”, according to ReTargeter CEO Arjun Dev Arora (who was formerly head of Business Development of Yahoo! Real Estate). Like traditional retargeting, ReTargeter Social serves ads to a brand’s audience after they’ve engaged without converting, yet in this case users are targeted via direct visits, Twitter feeds, Facebook, and other social marketing vehicles.  The social retargeting solution essentially allows brands to encourage and reward social influencers in any industry, as well as identify, reach and retarget to those top social influencers. This happens either through advanced targeting capabilities of on-site segmentation with the engagement thatyour brand receives from social-sharing, or via an algorithm that indexes top Twitter users within their industry, for example. Plus, using a combination of email and display advertising, brands are then able to reach these influencers with unique ads and make sure they’re delivered across the entire network. ReTargeter’s social solution also allows marketers to replace static ads with and interactive ad experience, sharing their latest articles, videos, polls, customer forms, and realtime feeds from a blog, Twitter, or their Facebook account.  This added social functionality beefs up the startup’s existing social feature set, which includes the ability to “like” a brand and engage with them continuously on Facebook (which author Tim Ferriss, the “The 4-Hour Work Week”-guy used to increase “likes” on Facebook), as well as ReFollower, which retargets with your Twitter feed, among others — allowing brands not only to enhance retargeting or direct buys through social channels, but also based on demographic, geographic region, and context. For more on ReTargeter, click here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In July, we covered the launch of a new Vaporware Labs (a software company that makes social, mobile, and web apps, like Steve Young Football for the iPad and iPhone, and MEETorDIE) service, called Commonred, which is attempting to take the “cold call/email/approach out of the networking process”. Commonred was essentially launched to not only help startup founders — but anyone in need of some professional networking — to more easily find shared points of interest between themselves and those they want to meet, network, or learn from. (Without the awkwardness.) To beef up its offerings for entrepreneurs and founders out there looking to have their ideas heard by people who matter, Commonred has launched a series of VIP meetings contests in which founders and entrepreneurs now have the opportunity to pitch VCs, journalists, Angels, and tech big wigs in an effort to push their businesses forward. The pitch with the most votes then wins a meeting with the person of interest, and, hopefully, the rest is history.  Traditionally, for those founders and entrepreneurs who may not necessarily have access to VCs or angels, or may not have had success with AngelList, accelerators, or pitching their ideas to media outlets, the road to victory can be a tough one. Which is what makes Commonred’s contests appealing to aspiring entrepreneurs out there. What’s more, the startups has already run contests for people like Tony Conrad, the founder of About.me and True Ventures, Ryan Spoon of Polaris Ventures and Dogpatch Labs, and Nick Efstratis, Managing Director of Epic Ventures. TechCrunch’s own MG Siegler was even a participator; you can see his contest here, which led to a meeting for the winning startup, GetComparisons (and to TC coverage last week). Commonred is currently running contests to get meetings with notables like David Bradford, the Chairman of publicly traded Fusion-io, who also has advisory and team roles with companies like Omniture, Novell, SCP Worldwide, as well as product designer, angel investor, TechCrunch contributor, and former CEO of Ustream, Chris Yeh. Generally speaking, Vaporware and Commonred Founder Derek Andersen told us, it takes between 10 and 100 votes to win constests, and once an idea is chosen, the founder receives a meeting of up to one hour in duration with the VC, angel, or journalist hosting the contest.  For VCs and journalists, this is a great way to meet an awesome new entrepreneur without clogging their inbox with pitches, and for VCs et al to give back to the community — with the process allowing the best founders and ideas to rise to the top.  The contests are ongoing, with five contests usually running at any given time. This week in particular, Commonred will have eight to ten running simultaneously. As to how entrepreneurs and their ideas might stand out amidst the onslaught of pitches from eager founders? Andersen said that submitting parties should find common threads with the person reviewing pitches: “If the VIP went to MIT, mention that you did too. If they invested in a company like yours 10-yrs ago, mention the link. Show that you care enough to do some homework”. And, again, with winners receiving coverage from tech publications and beyond (Andersen told me that one winner received a referral and interview for 500 Startups’ program), this can potentially be a game changer for startups looking for a jump start. For more, check out Commonred’s VIP Contests here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobeam this morning announced that it has raised $4.9 million in a Series A round of funding from Samsung Ventures, Mitsui, yet2Ventures and other unnamed investors.  The company has developed technology that enables mobile phones to interact with laser scanners used at retail and point-of-sale locations worldwide.    Mobeam says it will use the capital to establish its patented light-based communications technology as a new industry standard, and work with consumer and retail brands to develop and launch mobile couponing, ticketing and other mobile commerce initiatives. Mobeam says traditional laser scanners used in major retail locations all around the world are unable to communicate with mobile devices adequately, due to the way handset screens are currently constructed. The company’s technology basically enables retailers to ‘mobeam’ a barcode displayed on a mobile phone or tablet accurately, using their current laser scanners. Mobeam’s patented light-based communication technology utilizes LED tech to transform barcodes into a beam of light that every laser scanner can read. The technology can also simultaneously display 2D images and initiate NFC transmission, making it possible for retailers, brands and device manufacturers to develop mobile commerce strategies using existing infrastructures and technology.   Founded in 2010 as a spin-off from its parent company Ecrio, Mobeam is headquartered in Cupertino, California. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Guest author Aaron Levie is the founder and CEO of Box.net. The old technology guard of Silicon Valley is rapidly unhinging.  From the really old facing oscillating strategies and leaders; to the newly old churning through CEOs as fast as they dead-pool products, refocusing the entire company on competing with Zuckerberg, or causing major customer confusion as they shift into the future; or even the older-new, content with a pivot or two before a friendly landing into Google or Facebook. With this transition of old to new, and new to old, comes a strikingly rare opportunity to build the next great technology powerhouses. Today’s revolving technology landscape will favor those with a bias toward speed, change, and disruption. In the past few months alone, I’ve heard of new companies that stand to radically transform how we interact with healthcare, blow open television consumption, and make education mobile.  And refreshingly, I didn’t need any modifiers to describe these startups: nothing about “watching television while tweeting,” or “facilitating healthcare with local coupons.”  No, these have the potential to be game-changing services from entrepreneurs that have set their eyes on the dream. Marc Andreessen recently laid out an amazingly tight argument for why software will pretty much take over the world.  Or, to be more precise, eat it.  But this will only happen if we’re working on truly world-changing technology.  Technology that helps us to communicate, save and improve lives, or make better decisions in our businesses, faster. The launches at Disrupt and Demo a few weeks ago got me thinking about that magical stage in the startup lifecycle: the point in the building process where anything and everything is possible.  You have yet to make your first pivot, you couldn’t have been turned down by more than a couple of VCs, and I’m sure the team dynamic is just copacetic.  Ah, the glory days. Well, before you get much farther, here are a few unsolicited lessons I thought I’d share after five roller-coaster years in the valley: Make sure you’re constantly doing something that wasn’t possible 3 years ago The only companies worth starting in this industry are those that couldn’t have existed in another era.  And with the speed of change on the internet reaching escape velocity, eras are measured in quarters, not years.  If you’re not taking advantage of some fundamentally new enabler, you’re toast.  Maybe the advantage is an order of magnitude change in the price and availability of infrastructure because of the cloud (Cloudera, DotCloud, Twilio), or the now-ubiquitous access to powerful ‘smart’ devices (Square, Uber, Kno, Airy Labs), or a change in social behavior at both work and home (Yammer, Jive, HealthTap), or all three.  The idea is to constantly be reaching for the edge of what’s possible, extending the limits of what’s expected and turning the novel into habit.  If you don’t do this, you won’t stand out, you won’t gain traction, and you won’t win.  As Andy Grove would point out, if you’re not creating a 10X improvement on the dimension of cost, efficiency, or benefit to the consumer, you’re hosed. And emerging startups aren’t unique here.  The same rule applies to building new products within existing companies.  It’s how Apple has stayed “in power” in such consistent yet – at the time – unpredictable ways.  It’s how Facebook has modeled its innovation engine.  Facebook routinely assures us they’ll remain in a position of strength by enabling experiences and value that is at the bleeding edge of what’s technically and socially possible.  And for this same reason, we’ve seen Yahoo flounder over the past decade. In Yahoo’s case, we witness the fate of an innovator that has ostensibly “lost its way.”  On the web, you have very few opportunities for missteps.  To be the exception, the pace and frequency with which you need to build and bring new creations to market is incredible.  Even then, you’re assured of nothing, but it’s the only way to survive.  Consumers are fickle and a single technology cycle or trend that is missed can cost you relevance in the next wave.  Yahoo gave Google the keys to the search castle; they saw the internet media revolution coming, but fumbled by disintegrating Broadcast.com and producing poor user experiences throughout their media properties; and they let services exist without any clear and consistent strategy to unify the products, and with little innovation to boot.  This is an expensive lesson for one company, and serves as a great reminder to everyone else, large and small. Do something you’re extremely passionate about Startups are freaking hard.  Pretty much every day you go through a mood swing that would make you a poster child of TMZ (if you were only a little cooler).  For every one thing that goes right, there are no less than twenty-five things that have gone wrong.  There are dozens if not hundreds of other companies – some you’ve heard of, and some that won’t be launching until the next Disrupt – that would love for you to fail.  Andrew Mason has to contend with thousands of competitors, reporters, and speculators that would love to see his Groupon IPO falter.  That’s real pressure.  Employees, strategy, capital, competitors – and that’s assuming you don’t have any personal baggage.  Good luck with that. If you don’t build something, or solve a problem, that you’re extremely passionate about, you’re really only going to be able to handle the good times.  When things are going extremely well, life will be great.  You’ll love your job, you’ll love your investors, and your mom will love you, too.  But when crap hits the fan you’re going to begin to get weary.  And tired.  And depressed.  And if you’re not extremely passionate about what you’re doing, a market’s quick turn or a VC’s even quicker “no,” is more than enough to discourage you from your effort. But what kicks you back into gear is the utter energy, drive, and conviction that what you’re doing is so extremely badass – so uniquely tied to your actions and no one else’s – that you must go on.  This works even if you did happen to land somewhere other than your initial start. When we started Box in 2005, we didn’t do so with the goal of eradicating SharePoint from corporations.  But we did believe people should fundamentally be able to share and work from anywhere with extremely simple software.  The enterprise then became the context in which we executed our vision. The overarching challenge and potential of the technology gave us the passion to drive forward.  It also brings us clarity when our marketplace gets ugly, when we experience new threats, and when we’re pressed to make strategic decisions that will determine the fate of the company. Keep looking up (and never look down) There have been countless times when Box was supposed to be engulfed by lumbering giants, offering the same services more cheaply to corporations.  It’s a risk that all startups face, but competing in a category so dominated by – and important to – legacy enterprise players, we’ve experienced the extreme of this challenge.  And at times, the academically correct solution to a problem would have been to over-pivot, to fail fast and cut our losses. Like when Microsoft got into the cloud game.  Back in 2007.  Well, we’re still here. And this is where so many startups go astray.  Maybe it’s that they never believed in the idea in the first place; maybe it’s that they’re reading the market wrong, or taking faulty advice; maybe it’s because they’re tired.  I don’t know.  They will give up too early, quick to move onto the next idea, or act too small and not go big enough. But looking around the ecosystem, the companies that remain relevant today, after years or even decades, are ones that always looked upward.  Even at $140B in market-cap, and 35 years in, Oracle still thinks about what it wants to be when it grows up.  Amazon has done this fairly masterfully as well, successfully expanding their range of competitive products in various markets in just a few years. Thinking limitlessly about what you can be doing, and cutting the right moves to get there, is the game.  This often comes from a mix of having the right strategy (hard), the right people (harder), and maintaining the right psychology (hardest).  Are you growing as fast as you could be?  Are you taking on your big competitor in earnest, competing on the dimensions where you’re optimized and they’re not?  Is your business model optimal for your market?  How are you going to get your product past early adopters?  Are you building the right team to 10X your business? The lean startup methodology, in which startups entrust most of their core strategy, teaches us so much about building products and learning from customers, but painfully little about building companies.  I find that we’re often so obsessed with the idea of disrupting the status quo that we sometimes forget what that means and what it entails to do so.  Everyone has that opportunity, but not everyone takes that opportunity.  Or takes it to the fullest. Maybe I’m just in a sentimental mood, but we can probably all learn a little something from being introspective now and again.  We all have been given the gift of amazing resources, significant access to capital, amazing mentors, and the most democratic distribution channel the world will ever know.  Why shouldn’t every ounce of that good fortune go into building the absolutely most impactful and important companies that we can create?  Go forth and conquer. Photo credit: Robert Scoble. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This is a morbid topic to think about, but now that we have so many email, social media and other password-protected accounts, what happens to the access to this accounts when you pass away? Enter PassMyWill, which launched a few weeks ago at TechCrunch Disrupt’s hackathon. PassMyWill is basically a will for your online assets. The site distributes your social network passwords to your trusted loved ones after you die. Here’s how it works. On the site you create an account with your name and enter who your next of kin is and their email address. You also enter an encryption key that the recipient would know (i.e. the last four digits of your social security number). And then you enter the data, passwords and more that you want your next of kin to takeover once you pass. When you die, this information will be passed on to the recipient. So how does PassMyWill figure out when you are actually dead? You connect your Facebook and Twitter accounts on the site, and the startup will monitor how often you are posting and what is being posted on your wall. Once PassMyWill is convinced you may be gone, your next of kin receives the ‘Dead Man’s Switch’ e-mail. Founder Danil Kozyatnikov, who traveled to Disrupt from Siberia, Russia; assures that all data stored on PassMyWill is completely encrypted. Check out our video with Kozyatnikov (whose Startup Alley company Quest.li was chosen as an audience choice winner) below. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInHeiferman on His Early CompaniesMeetup co-founder and CEO, Scott Heiferman is Chris Dixon’s guest in this episode of Founder Stories. A serial entrenepenur, Heiferman tells Dixon he started “the first online ad agency in ’94” after corporate America left him unsatisfied. Called i-traffic, “the idea was to be an online media buying agency even though there wasn’t any media to buy at the time.” Five years later Heiferman sold i-traffic to Agency.com. Following the exit, Heiferman was unsettled and says he “went a little bit crazy not knowing what I wanted to do with my life.” Heiferman took a job at McDonald’s—a move he credits to the company he was keeping. “I was hanging around with too many lawyers and accountants and at the time I just wanted to see what it was like to be a part of an actual real business.” After flipping burgers Heiferman jumped back into the startup scene with RocketBoard, a project he describes as “a colossal failure and actually we blew through about $20 million dollars of AOL money.” The silver lining? Heiferman received advice that sticks with him to this day—create products to help the greater good of society. Resuming their conversation below, Heiferman discusses Fotolog, a company he launched just prior to founding Meetup. Heiferman started the photo sharing site in 2002 and says “it became the number one social network” in several countries. It eventually sold for millions of dollars. However, Heiferman notes Fotolog’s top status eroded when Flickr hit the web and it made Heiferman realize that no company is totally secure against competition. Lesson learned, Heiferman tells Dixon “I don’t think you can take for granted that any social network is going to be here 10 years from now.” Make sure to listen to both clips for additional insights, including what Dixon observed while delivering pizza. Past episodes of Founder Stories are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Should founders take money off the table in later venture rounds, and if so under what circumstances?  An extraordinary private email to Airbnb CEO Brian Chesky from investor and former Facebook exec Chamath Palihapitiya which was leaked to Kara Swisher at AllThingsD brings this question into sharp focus once again.  The email is reprinted below, you should read it in it’s entirety.   Palihapitiya doesn’t take issue so much with the founders collecting $21 million of the $112 million round for themselves, but rather with the way that they did it.  “My basic principle on this stuff is that if you want liquidity, that’s fine, but you should make it available to everyone. Otherwise, no one should get it,” he writes.  They took it as a straight dividend which, notes Palihapitiya, “allows you guys to take money out of the business and not dilute yourself.” Airbnb isn’t the first hot startup to take money off the table during a big venture round.  Groupon insiders famously took $345 million from a $950 million round back in December, 2010, before things started getting hairy.  And half of Twitter’s recent $800 million round went specifically to buy out employees shares.  But there is a difference between how Airbnb and Groupon founders rewarded themselves and how Twitter did it.  Twitter spread the money more evenly to employees and early shareholders instead of funneling almost all of it to the founders. A new class of investors is stepping in to provide liquidity to founders, employees, and early shareholders.  With the rise of what I call mezzanine venture capital (DST-type deals that function as a bridge between late stage growth deals and an IPO) it has become increasingly common for startup founders and employees to cash out before an IPO or acquisition.  In general this is a good thing as it rewards those who take the risk to build successful startups, but if the rewards are not spread equitably it can backfire. Palihapitiya warns, “If you are viewed as self-dealing and shady, it will only hurt your long term prospects.”  Read his entire email below and weigh in with your thoughts in comments: From: Chamath PalihapitiyaDate: Sat, 1 Oct 2011 11:16:05 -0700To: Brian CheskySubject: Airbnb financing…Brian,Cc Marc, Reid, my deal team Thanks again for giving me the chance to participate in your latest financing. I had a chance to review the docs at length yesterday and I wanted to follow up as, quite honestly, I’ve never seen a deal like this over ~60 investments I’ve done and I’m pretty concerned. I’m all for getting the best valuation you can, minimizing dilution and maximizing control. We did this brilliantly at Facebook…all of our financings (except our first $$$ from Peter Thiel) were done not out of necessity but opportunity. As such, our investors had virtually no control and it resulted in a much better outcome. As we’ve discussed, I generally don’t believe investors add much to a success story and so minimizing their impact is a great strategy when you are onto something that is working. This said, while several of these concepts are reflected in the current deal, there is one big thing that I am fundamentally against and violates my principles and will prevent me from participating in your round. When I saw that you guys were taking $31M out of the company, I didn’t think much of it as I just assumed it would entirely be via a secondary sale. But as I understand the deal, it seems that you are doing only $9.6M in secondary and $22.5M as a dividend to common (of which $21M goes to you and your co-founders). I am really uncomfortable with this and don’t think its in the spirit of building a good, long term business. Effectively, it is a strategy that allows you guys to take money out of the business and not dilute yourself — I’m not sure why this is such a big deal when you guys are almost 90% vested and the financing is at $1.2B where your dilution is marginal. Further, it excludes many of the employees that probably have helped you and your co–founders get the company to this place as most of these folks probably don’t have any stock but have unexercised stock options and thus won’t get a dividend.My basic principle on this stuff is that if you want liquidity, that’s fine, but you should make it available to everyone. Otherwise, no one should get it. Your current deal is the farthest away from this principle that I’ve seen in a while…this strategy has been done once before — at Groupon. We can see how “well” they are doing and how short term the investor community is now viewing their motives. I really think you can do better than this…and that you are better than this. Separately, when you look at successful tech companies, it seems that dividends are an approach used by cash rich operations to distribute excess earnings — in fact, the most successful, cash rich tech company in the world, Apple, hasn’t issued a dividend and they have more than $75B in cash! Again, while I think Airbnb will be a good company, this is nowhere near the truth now — you guys still need to scale and build this thing for the future. I really think you are onto something but I would implore you to not take the easy way out. Treat your employees the same as you’d treat yourself. Do things that you will be proud of and can defend to anyone including your Board, employees, prospective hires etc. In such a competitive hiring market, you are competing with not just your obvious competitors, but also any successful tech company who is also looking for great talent. A principle that treats your employees as well as you’d treat yourself is a huge strategy for differentiation, retention and long term happiness of the exact types of people you will need to be successful. In contrast, if you are viewed as self-dealing and shady, it will only hurt your long term prospects… In summary, I’m passing on this financing because I strongly disagree with what’s going on. I’m not sure who advocated this approach but I did mention this to Reid [Hoffman, another Airbnb investor via Greylock Partners] last night and he was of a similar mind to myself and surprised this was the approach being taken. If you want some good advice — I would ask that you consider pinging him about different ways to think about going about the liquidity portion. If you change your mind on how to close this financing, let me know and I’d love to reconsider. Otherwise, good luck and lets keep in touch. Take care, ChamathLatest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post is by Justin Kan, cofounder of Justin.tv and TwitchTV. You can follow him on Twitter here and read his blog here. Behavior is a virus. We spread our behavior to those around us, whether passively or on purpose. Pop quiz: what factor most highly correlates with obesity? It isn’t income, race, religion, or genetics. It turns out that the best indicator of obesity is your friend group: if you have overweight friends, you are more likely to be overweight yourself. This makes sense, because you develop your behavior set from interactions with those around you. If your friends are physically active and eat well, you’ll have more opportunities to be physically active yourself, and spend more time over healthy meals. Alternatively, if your friends are living a real-life version of Super Size Me, you’re likely on the express train to type II diabetes. Given enough exposure to a behavior, that behavior will become normative. This is true for both positive and negative behaviors. One simple behavior I’ve seen spread through my own friend group is riding motorcycles. I first started riding a few years ago after two of my friends came by on their bikes (having wanted to start for years, but never having a catalyst until that moment). Fast forward four years and both my brothers, two roommates and many other friends are riding, with many more in various stages of taking the rider’s test and joining the organ donor’s club. Over the past several years I’ve been surprised to learn that this is also the case for entrepreneurship. For most people, startups are a risky endeavor and something to be avoided. Many are hesitant to quit their secure jobs and try to start a company from scratch. From an expected value perspective, when factoring in some risk adversity attributable to basic human nature, they are correctly maximizing outcomes. However, for a growing group, I’ve noticed that startups are a normalized behavior, and that this generally spreads through personal connections. My brother Daniel is the perfect example of this. When Daniel graduated from college in 2009, the economy was in a horrible recession, and it was extremely difficult for new grads to find jobs. Initially having very little interest in startups, he started doing sales and business development at Uservoice after finding no options in consulting and banking, where the few friends of his fortunate enough to find work were headed. After a couple years of being friends with founders and early employees of startups, hearing about startups everyday and rooming with startup founders, he made the jump himself and recruited a team to launch Appetizely. An example of culture-hacking at scale is Y Combinator. One of the reasons I think Y Combinator is so powerful is because it creates a new social norm, especially for those who come from outside Silicon Valley. When you start at YC, your friends and family think you’re crazy. By the end, you have another friend cohort: other YC entrepreneurs and alumni. These new friends will provide support and advice, but the most important thing that they give you is implicit assurance that you are not crazy. The lesson here is that through some clever social engineering you can hack your own life to put yourself in the position to accomplish goals you don’t even know how to begin. This is also also  how ZeroCater started. Over three years ago I was interviewing candidates for a community manager postition at Justin.tv. One interviewee particularly stood out. Arram didn’t have any experience or really any qualifications; in fact, at the time he had been working as a security guard and had never been to college. But, unlike most of the other candidates, he had thought extensively about what he would do as the community manager and had written down his many ideas in preparation for our interview. He was also passionate about creating his own startup eventually, and his excitement was inspiring. We ended up hiring someone else who had more community management experience for the job, but I was so impressed with Arram’s preparation that we hired him anyways to do random office projects. One of Arram’s minor responsibilities ended up being ordering meals for the company. It ended up being such a time saver for the team that one evening I suggested that he offer ordering as a service to a few other YC startups in the neighborhood. That was the last I thought about it, but a month later I was shocked when Arram came back to me and told me he was quitting to grow it as a startup. Two years later, and he’s recruited a technical team, built out software to manage the entire workflow and serve companies like MTV, CBS and Verizon. Arram didn’t have the programming or product background that you would expect from someone who would later go on to raise over $1 million in venture capital for a technology startup. He got in the game by doing whatever it took to get into a startup and surrounded himself with startups, making it impossible for him to not think about startups. Just being in the community creates opportunities: how else would you come up with the idea for a food subscription service that solves a very specific company problem? You can hack your own culture. Surround yourself with people who do what you want to do, and eventually you’ll wake up to find yourself doing the same. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Remember Connectify? The downloadable software that turns PCs into Wi-Fi hotspots in just a few minutes? It looks like the company now has a new investor: In-Q-Tel (IQT), which just so happens to be the strategic investment firm that seeks out new technologies for the U.S. Intelligence Community, including the CIA. The new funding will help Connectify move beyond simple Wi-Fi hotspot creation, a decidedly consumer-facing service, in order to focus on VPNs (virtual private networks). Using similar easy-to-install software, Connectify will soon enable users to spontaneously create self-forming VPNs without dialing into a central location. The VPNs will also leverage the combined throughput and reliability of all the available Internet connections, the company says. The additional security and feature set will be integrated into both Connectify’s current product line-up as well as into its upcoming and yet-to-announced products. Connectify informs us that it can’t disclose the amount of funding IQT provided due to the organization’s sensitive mission involving bringing technology to the U.S. intelligence community. Still, it’s easy to envision potential use cases for the technology, especially in situations where authoritarian government regimes watch over their citizens’ Internet communications far too closely. But the enhanced security will benefit stateside consumers too, by offering a safer way to share your Internet access with those around you. And here we were thinking Windows PC software was boring…consider our interest piqued. Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco-based Pantheon opened its doors to the public today after a year building its Web development platform for Drupal sites.  (Drupal is an open-source content management system).  Pantheon is a combination of a Web development tool in the cloud and a Web hosting and management service.  Companies can develop, test, host, and manage their websites on Pantheon  It is all based in the cloud, and the service is free for developers.  Once you make a site go live, it costs $100  a month. The company raised a $1.3 million seed round a year ago from First Round Capital, Baseline, Floodgate, Founder Collective, and Heroku founders James Lindenbaum, Adam Wiggins, and Orion Henry.  You can think of Pantheon as a Heroku for Drupal sites in that it puts the web development environment in the cloud.  Founder and CEo Zack Rosen has  simpler description of what Pantheon offers.  ” You can get an enterprise-complete website for your organization with the level of polish of a consumer-grade site.” The reason so many corporate and organization websites look out of date is because they are built with expensive, proprietary Web development software that fails to keep up with what is going on in the consumer Web.  Pantheon offers a platform for developing custom sites.  It is built on top of Drupal, which is fast and versatile, but Pantheon makes Drupal development more accessible.  Pantheon makes it easy to deploy different versions of a site on test servers and the live site, as well as backup servers.  Some Websites are already running on Pantheon.  Customers include the United Nations Global Pulse site, USC Marshall School of Business, and online publisher TheFix.  The unique twist that Pantheon brings to the table is that it is not just a development environment.  Once a site is ready to go live, it runs the site as well.  “We carry the pager for your website if anything goes down,” says Rosen. It also has done the hard work to optimize Drupal so that every site runs really fast. Pantheon itself runs on Rackspace Cloud.   Why not Amazon Web Services?  “Rackspace is much faster at running Drupal than Amazon,” says Rosen.  But the backend is built to make it portable if Pantheon ever decides to move. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ex-Googler Jake Quist is debuting a new stealthy startup, called Zillabyte, that aims to disrupt the data analysis space. Quist explains that while he and his co-founder were engineers at Google, they were able to access a number of internal, extremely in-depth data analysis tools. But aside from being powerful, these tools were convenient for Quist and other Googlers to use and made it easy to analyze data and make better decisions. As Quist tells me, When we left Google, we realized that data analysis outside the Googleplex kind of sucks. Big time. The tools available are so niche that only big enterprise can purchase them. The alternatives suck too. Quist and his co-founder saw an opportunity to create an application that analyzes big-data but that doesn’t require a PhD to use. Basically, Zillabyte allows users to focus on their analysis and takes are of all the ugly technical details. The value proposition, says Quist, is convenience and ease of use without having to sacrifice functionality. We’re told the application allows business users to create and run high-end analyses in the cloud. Zillabyte will remove the pain of acquiring and cleaning data, managing resources, and implementing difficult algorithms. Zillabyte builds upon known paradigms, such as spreadsheets, and automatically scales resources to run the analysis. For example, a business user can run a sentiment algorithm on Twitter, correlate it with the stock market, and visualize the resulting pattern. Users only pay for resources consumed. Power users can extend this functionality further with custom code and build entire “big-data” apps against the Zillabyte infrastructure. Zillabyte will also come with ready-to-use datasets. One of those datasets is a crawled copy of the web. (Yes, the entire web). Users can gain insights such as: “how many sites use Facebook Connect?” or “how many sites are translated into Japanese?”. The user doesn’t need to know anything about Hadoop, and only pays for the resources used. Additionally, Zillabyte will come with high-end algorithms, such as natural language processing (NLP) tools. For example, a user may use the crawled-web and NLP algorithms to extract all the locations associated with Barack Obama. She can then use this data to create an interactive visualization. Of course, the underlying theme around all of these processes is that Zillabyte is easy to use for business users. Unfortunately, the startup, which is self-funded, is in private beta and will launch to the public in March of next year. There’s no doubt that the big data, business intelligence space has huge potential. We’ll see soon if Zillabyte can be one of the disruptive startups in this market. Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As promised earlier this summer, mobile video calling app Tango has finally made it to the PC. Today, a year after its launch on iOS and Android, Tango is now available for Windows desktop computers (XP, Vista and Windows 7). The company says a Mac version will be available later this year. As with the mobile product, the new PC version is designed to be easy to use. There is no login or password required. Instead, you just enter in your phone number and email address to get started. For existing Tango users, the PC app automatically populates your address book with your Tango contacts – that is, the folks the app originally discovered in your phone’s contact list upon first install. You can also invite people to join Tango from the new PC app via SMS or email. Although we didn’t have much opportunity to experiment with the app in its pre-launch state, there is one major, noticeable difference between it and Skype: it looks like a giant iPhone.  Tango has consistently focused on having a minimalist feature set, and the PC app is no different. At launch, there aren’t advanced options like group calling, text chat, file sharing options or credits to purchase. Says Tango Co-founder Eric Setton, of those, text chat would be “great to have” in the future, but it’s not something that’s immediately planned. As for group calling, Tango thinks of that as more of a business-grade feature, and, given its focus on the consumer, is not interested in including it at this time, either. What is planned for the near future, though, is a premium level of service. Setton says Tango’s voice and video calling will always be free but some yet-to-be announced paid services will be made available later this year as optional add-ons. Tango will not charge for usage or include advertising, Setton confirms, but the company is confident that it can turn a percentage of its 23 million users into paying customers. In July, the company took in $42 million in series B financing led by Draper Fisher Jurvetson, the same VC firm that first invested in Skype. Angel investors Len Blavatnik and Alex Zubillaga also participated. This funding was on top of the $14 million Tango already had in venture capital. Windows was chosen as the third platform for Tango based on its size (1.5 billion PC’s worldwide) in addition to being the number one feature request from Tango users. To date, Setton says Tango’s adoption has followed smartphone trends with 50% of its user base in the U.S. and the developed markets in Asia, Europe and the Middle East. The rapidly growing service is now adding 70,000 to 80,000 new members daily, with 75% of its sign-ups coming through word-of-mouth recommendations. With Tango’s Windows launch, those numbers should increase yet again. You can grab the new Tango PC app from the company’s website here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nexus S or iPhone? Kindle Fire or iPad? Samsung TV or LG TV? When people try to make such decisions, they usually look for as much data as possible so they can compare choices. For many gadgets, that’s relatively easy because you can compare similar specs such as CPU speed, RAM, screen size, etc. But what about for everything else? That’s what the startup GetComparisons is going after. They aim to be the “Epinions for comparisons,” founder Akshay Arabolu says. The service is all about gathering user-written product reviews and formatting them in such a way that it’s easy to compare things. While a service like gdgt does a great job of this for gadgets, Arabolu found a pain point in trying to figure out if he should use WordPress or Tumblr for blogging. So that’s the service he set out to build. “We want to own the mindshare for comparisons on the web,” Arabolu says. “But we don’t want it to be Britney Spears versus Lady Gaga — we want to focus on products and services that people spend time and money on,” he continues, noting that they started with web products but are now broadening their scope. It’s all about what comparisons the users are interested in seeing, he notes. Anyone can request a review on the site. And again, it’s the users who then populate the reviews. “We provide a template for the reviews,” Arabolu explains. “It’s somewhere in the middle of Quora and Yahoo Answers,” he continues, noting that they wanted to make it as simple as possible, but also make it robust enough to provide good information. Reviews feature individual attributes that go from one to five stars (I don’t love the one to five star system, as I explain here). But there’s also plenty of room for users to explain their ratings. In terms of the fear that people may game such a system, Arabolu says their commitment to transparency in the reviews will mitigate that. In fact, the plan is to let official representatives for companies fill out specs and explain features of products as long as they’re properly identified as employees of the brand. Arabolu says that he started building GetComparisons a year ago with two contractors. In March of this year, he hired his first full-time employee, and now they are a team of five. The Atlanta-based startup came my way after I did a talk a couple months ago and agreed to sit down with one company in the audience as voted on by the CommonRed community. They beat out 52 other entries, so clearly have some people pulling for them. GetComparisons just got done with a new redesign this week. One thing you won’t find anywhere on the site: ads. “We spent too much time on our UI,” Arabolu says. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quora can be an addiction. You visit the site just to see what’s going on, 30 minutes later you’re still there. Today, the addiction goes mobile. Finally. The service has just released their first iOS native app. Tailored for the iPhone and iPod touch, I can safely say that it’s awesome. I’ve been testing it out for the past few days, and my own personal usage of the service has already skyrocketed. Why? A few reasons. First, the app is fast — really fast. “That was one of our top two or three goals from the beginning,” co-founder Charlie Cheever says. He notes that they achieve speeds better than you see on their site because they made a few trade-offs in terms of live updates and overall content. But they’re also doing a lot of pre-fetching, guessing what you might look for next. Personally, I love that you can hop from stream to question page and back again without having to reload everything as you do on the web. The second thing I love about the app is that it’s location-aware. Quora recently turned on the location element of the service, and the app takes full advantage of it. Clicking on the “Nearby” tab brings up a list of topics in the area around your current location. This will be fantastic for traveling. The third thing is push notifications. If I ask a question, I want to know when I get an answer. But I don’t want to sit around at my computer all day waiting. The iPhone app gives you a good way to untether yourself. There are notifications for other actions on the service as well. “We try to strike the right balance between letting you know about important and interesting things on Quora that you would want to know about and not overwhelming you and blowing up your phone at all hours,” Cheever notes. Searching, writing a post, and adding a question are all in the same middle tab. “That’s been a tricky interface to get right,” Cheever concedes. But it works pretty well. When you go to add a question, you first must search to make sure it doesn’t already exist, just like on the site. When you add the question, you can easily tweet out, send to Facebook, etc. Another great feature unique to mobile: Shuffle. When you hit the bottom of your main Quora feed, you’ll notice an option to “Load More…” or “Shuffle”. Clicking on Shuffle takes you to a random question. “It’s kind of bottomless,” Cheever jokes. Right now, the shuffle is totally random, but Quora is thinking about tailoring it to your likes eventually. The app was built by a couple of Quora employees (one engineer and one designer) over the course of a few months. Yes, it’s iOS-only for now. “We get a lot of traffic to our website from iPhones, so that made sense,” Cheever says. You can read more about the new app here. And you can find it here. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Redfin, the online platform for real estate search and brokerage services, has made some noise in the past, building a service that’s currently being valued at $230 million, at least according to trading on SharesPost. It’s been a little while since we’ve heard some big news from the Seattle-based company, but this morning the real estate brokerage is releasing a cool new feature that puts real estate agents on notice and gives home buyers and sellers a nifty “hot or not” comparison tool. Redfin is today releasing the “Redfin Scouting Report”, a way for users to look up the performance statistics for over 1 million real estate agents in 14 major metropolitan areas, with information on nearly every agent in these cities, according to Redfin CEO Glenn Kelman.  Of course, many of these agents may not have been active in the last few years, so the report offers users scouting statistics like, for example, the ability to see how many homes the agent has sold, over the past three years, and in the past 12 months, where on the map those homes are, pictures of the homes, the average number of price drops, median price of sale, how often they’ve represented buyers versus sellers, and more. Redfin’s report will thus serve stats for agents’ performance serving both buyers and sellers.  Redfin’s goal here seems fairly simple: With consumers being able to see how good their agent really is, they’ll be able to make fact-based decisions about which agents to use when selling their homes, tailoring a choice to their specific needs. It’s an interesting play, and could be an extremely useful tool to home buyers and sellers, and will certainly act as a wake up call to those less active (and perhaps shady) agents out there.  What’s more, with the real estate market as it is, the report also allows users to view how many distressed properties an agent has helped to buy — REO and foreclosure experience are very important to people right now. In terms of the current outlook for Redfin at large, according to Kelman, the real estate company has now helped people buy or sell more than 10,000 homes and, though the site’s traffic is lower than Trulia and Zillow, Redfin only covers listings over a third of the U.S. — the downside to being a brokerage — yet it differs in its core business model. Redfin seeks to compete as real estate agents against other real estate agents, not as a media site serving traditional real estate agents.  The site’s value proposition also entails a more effective search offering than other sites, Kelman said, because the service offers all the homes that are for sale via a database used by real estate brokers. What’s more, instead of taking a percentage of sale, Redfin charges a flat fee to home sellers, paying agents customer satisfaction bonuses rather than commissions — and for buyers, it refunds up to half of the brokerage fee.  For more of TechCrunch’s coverage of Redfin, see Erick’s post on Redfin’s addition of data points here and Mike’s interview with Kelman and investor/board member James Slavet here. You can also find the Redfin Scouting Report here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SweetLabs, the San Diego company behind the Pokki app platform and the OpenCandy advertising network, has raised $13 million in funding in a Series C round led by Intel Capital, with earlier backers Google Ventures and Bessemer Venture Partners also participating. The fresh money will primarily be used to invest in Pokki, a platform that lets developers create and distribute desktop apps using standard Web languages like CSS3 and JavaScript, the company says. SweetLabs was originally founded in 2008; Pokki went live in beta last June (download link). Before you click, a warning: Pokki is only available for Windows XP, Vista and Windows 7 so far. The startup has raised $21.5 million in financing to date. I’m left wondering if they still don’t shake hands with each other at board meetings. Update: they still don’t shake hands. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Primary and high school teachers already have a hard job. It’s difficult to envy the pour souls who had the unfortunate position of educating the type of disorderly rapscallions like myself at a young age. Not to mention, enduring low wages and a system largely devoid of the same technological aids that have come to assist nearly every other profession. When it comes to the actual daily process of designing the curricula that students will follow, teachers basically have to create their own, ad hoc, every night. There are lesson plan sites, but most of the content is outdated and disorganized. Lesson plans haven’t really made the jump into the digital era. A Boston-based startup called BetterLesson launched to address this pain point with a simple mission: Provide an easy way for educators to connect with each other and share their lessons. As Co-founder and VP of Operations Erin Osborn and Founder and CEO Alex Grodd are both former teachers themselves (and Jonathan Hendler, the third co-founder and CTO has a mom who was a career teacher), they were tired of watching as cool, original lesson plans would disappear into the folders and hard drives of obsolescence. So the founders set out to design an open, social platform to aggregate the best K thru 12 teacher-generated content. Since launching, BetterLesson has attracted a community of “tens of thousands of educators”, according to the company’s blog post, and has collected hundreds of thousands K-12 lesson plans. Last year, KIPP, the 112-school charter network, joined the platform and helped the team “develop a suite of premium features” for schools. In less than a year, the site’s paying customers have grown to over 200 schools. To help it grow, the startup has announced that it has officially closed a $1.6 million series A round of venture funding from a host of venture firms, including Highland Capital Partners, General Catalyst, New Markets Ventures, and NewSchools Venture Fund — as well as angel investors like Steve Kaufer of Trip Advisor, Matt Greenfield (Stonework Capital), and Shawn and Jennifer Carolan of Menlo Ventures, NewSchools Venture Fund, and more. BetterLesson will use the new round of funding to ramp up hiring and continue building out its platform and going after user acquisition. Speaking of funding, beyond outside investment, how is the startup monetizing? BetterLesson offers premium, on-site networks for enterprise customers, for which it charges a fee. The majority of the platform is free for educators, but school districts etc. can customize their home page and access enhanced functionality by opting for this premium network subscription. Considering the startup allows teachers to browse a serious repository of documents, presentations, lessons and even complete units and courses, all through a simple search interface, and upload their own lessons onto a dashboard, you can see why teachers will love this kind of resource. Then add the ability to share curricula directly with international educators and receive feedback, and you’ve got yourself a goddamn deal, as Dave Chappelle would say.  For more on how BetterLesson works, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily isocket, a startup that makes it easy to buy and sell online advertising, is making a few big announcements today, including the closing of a multi-million dollar series A round of funding from their existing seed investors (the startup raised $1.8 million back in 2009), which includes some big name angels/VCs like Tim Draper of Draper Fisher Jurvetson, David Blumberg of Blumberg Capital, Jeff Clavier of SoftTech VC, and David Cohen of TechStars. (Disclosure: TechCrunch uses isocket to power its direct advertising.) In addition to its new infusion of capital, isocket is announcing that it has poached Ben Trenda from the Rubicon Project. Ben is joining isocket as VP of Sales. TechCrunch covered his exit from Aol (where he was the VP of Agency Relationships) to join Rubicon in April of last year. At Rubicon, Trenda was responsible for launching the company’s realtime bidding business and helped the Project grow to the second largest ad exchange behind Google.  In addition to powering direct advertising for publishers like Mashable, VentureLoop, GameZebo, and Appolicious, isocket is officially announcing that it is has added Aol Tech properties, including TUAW (and will soon add Joystiq and Engadget) to its roster of clients. isocket has also forged a supply-side partnership with Google to integrate with its DoubleClick ad server, which means that the company  will soon be plugging directly into DoubleClick For Publishers (a service used by the majority of major publishers) to bring direct ad sales straight to its customers without all the traditional hassle.  isocket Founder and CEO John Ramey told us that publishers like the Cheezburger Network are already using this DoubleClick integration, and the adoption is going very well for both isocket and Google. To give a sense of what isocket does, the startup’s service makes it easy for advertisers to connect with premium publishers to buy advertising and, in turn, makes it simple for those publishers to sell their digital ads. Traditionally, for publishers who want to sell ads, sales staff (or founders, etc.) would have to manage their relationships with buyers over the phone, by email, and Excel.  It involves gathering ad mockups, inventory-ing, a lengthy back and forth over size of ads, formatting, pricing, etc. and management of the whole process in spreadsheets. Simply buying an ad directly, an act that should be two-click easy, turns into a multiple-week-long process that is a pain in the ass for everyone involved.  isocket’s products seek to streamline the process by allowing publishers to setup a profile, create their ad inventory, and then essentially offers a micro-marketplace from which advertisers can peruse those ads and all related info, and buy the ads they want with a few clicks. It’s a self-service platform, and the publisher is emailed directly once an interested buyer chooses to purchase the ad, allowing them to accept or reject. Once they approve, isocket takes care of the rest.  And today, the startup is announcing a feature that adds additional functionality for advertisers, allowing them to place orders straight from their agency’s software that they already use — they can now search listings of premium publishers and their best inventory without having to worry about using other platforms to do business. Essentially, with the addition of these new features to its BuyAds platform, isocket has created a robust platform for premium inventory with the benefit of programmatic direct sales via its API. What this means is that publishers can now share their inventories directly with the buying tools advertisers already use, like demand side platforms and media planners. In other words, less hassle, quick sales, and more orders. Now, with isocket’s APIs, users can search the platform’s curated catalog of premium publishers, search third party publishers as well, view what inventory is available at what prices, place orders directly (and programatically), make payments, and access metrics on ad performance. Some of this may sound obscure and a bit niche, but for advertisers, marketers, and publishers, isocket is building a pretty nifty platform that really brings direct ad sales into the digital era. For a deep dive into isocket’s announcements, check out their blog post here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily mDialog, a video-advertising-as-a-service company, has closed a $5 million Series A round of funding led by the BlackBerry Partners Fund.   The company says the investment will be used to expand its offerings across all mobile and connected devices such as the iPad and iPhone, as well as Android, Roku and other platforms. mDialog basically enables broadcasters and operators to ‘deliver TV commercials everywhere’ using their existing ad operations workflow. mDialog’s Stream Mediation Platform enables its customers to provide both a lean-back TV commercial experience much like with traditional linear broadcast TV, as well as an interactive brand engagement experience on tablets, smartphones and other devices.  “The proliferation of tablets and smartphones, as well as the continued embraced adoption of over-the-top boxes and cord-cutting, has changed the game for television,” says John Albright, co-managing partner with the BlackBerry Partners Fund. “Consumers are no longer tied to one device and their programming will follow them everywhere. Operators, programmers and video publishers all recognize the value a company like mDialog delivers in ushering in this next generation.”   Latest headlines delivered to you daily The first startup to come out of New York-based incubator Jesta Labs is Gush, which launches today with a (currently invite-only) service that lets people put all their photos – no matter how many they have – privately in the cloud and organize them in a straightforward way. Gush, which is free of charge, aims to become a central repository for photos that people currently have scattered all over their computers and phones, Facebook profiles, Flickr and Instagram accounts and so on.  Think of it as a hard drive in the cloud, accessible from anywhere with any device. The key USP: the free service lets you store an unlimited amount of photos. Gush is hardly the first to try and build a business around the ‘photo cloud’ idea (they aim to generate revenue down the line with printing options, photobooks, digital goods such as adding effects to photos etc.). We’ve written about its two prime competitors in the past: see our coverage of TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Everpix and YC-funded Snapjoy for similar services. Peter Van Dijck, the founder-in-residence of Gush, created video aggregator Mefeedia in 2004 and sold it in 2007. His new fledgling company is currently negotiating with VCs for follow-up funding. Good news for TechCrunch readers! Gush is invite-only for now, but when you sign up here you’ll get priority access. You’re welcome. Latest headlines delivered to you daily One week after its launch, new startup accelerator and incubator Advise.me has received over 200 applications for its “Global Startup Initiative,” a program that encourages companies from all parts of the world to apply. Several of those entrants are “pretty compelling,” Solomon Engel, Advise.me Founder and CEO tells us. That may be one of the reasons why the program is now increasing the funding possibilities for its participants. Initially, the program was touting seed funding for startups as either $6,000 to $7,000 per founder, or up to $25,000 in total. However, as of now, that cap is being removed. Some startups may see “potentially much larger” seed and series rounds from its investment partners and institutions, Advise.me says. The amount of funding will be determined by the investors. Advise.me’s program is offering a slightly different take on startup advising than some of the others in the space. Instead of a classroom approach, each startup receives one-on-one support from a team of 2 to 7 industry experts who have experience that’s relevant to the startup they’re paired with. That not only improves the quality of the advice the team can give, but the advisors can also help startups by connecting founders to the appropriate industry contracts. In addition, the team will go beyond advisory duties and get actively involved with different areas of the business, including helping their startups get media exposure through the team’s contacts, working on product development, helping form strategic partnerships and more. Explains Advise.me, in its system, this hands-on approach makes the team much more vested in the company they’re supporting. Startups also receive $2,000 per month in Media Temple or RackSpace hosting for a year, 3 months of office space (rent and utility free), VIP invites to Advise.me events and meetups and the chance to demo to investors, partners and media. Advise.me’s team already included an impressive group of advisors, with folks from Google, Facebook, YouTube, Spotify, EA, Sencha, Xero, Sega, Apple, Playdom, Yahoo, Nokia, AOL and several other big-name companies on board. It’s now adding six more to advisors to the list: Brenden Mulligan, Entrepreneur & Founder of Onesheet, Jeffrey Kalmikoff, VP of Product at SimpleGeo, Kurt Wilms, Founder and CEO at fflick (acquired by Google), Philip Fierlinger, Co-founder & Head of Design at Xero, Nitin Gupta, VP, Business Development at Retailigence Corporation and Bruce Watermann, SVP Print Operations at Blurb. More details on Advise.me’s Global Startup Initiative are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kicking it into fifth gear and zooming out of stealth and into the public sphere today is Wheelz, a new person-to-person car sharing platform for campuses — designed to connect students who have cars with student who need ’em. Granted, when I first heard the basics on Wheelz, I immediately thought, “gadzooks, another car sharing platform!?” What about RelayRides, GetAround, Zimride, and Zipcar? These are all by and large great young businesses, adding value to the space; sure they’re not all targeting campuses, but I wasn’t so sure we needed another one. Whether you feel the same way or not, Wheelz begs to differ. Launching initially at Stanford University, the startup is bringing campuses a technology and service platform that allows students and other campus dwellers to connect safely and easily — through Facebook integration, a good-looking iPhone app, and its proprietary in-car hardware system, called DriveBox.  Facebook integration and mobile apps are fairly standard for savvy online businesses today, but the latter feature isn’t. Once a user signs up for Wheelz, the startup will install the DriveBox in their car for free (installation takes about an hour), which will allow other Wheelz members to unlock the car using the startup’s iPhone app or Wheelz card. This is a great feature for those who don’t have time to meet the person to give them keys, or don’t want to (can’t) make a new key, etc.   After sign up, the company then provides a secure “Key Box” in which owners can leave the key so that renters can start the car. They Key Box also contains a gas card, so that when your car falls below a quarter of a tank, the person driving the car is responsible for filling the car up, using the gas card. The owner of the car is responsible for the price of gas, which will be deducted from the owner’s total earnings each month. Earnings? What earnings? Well, there are very few free rides in life, my friend. The person driving your car is obliged to pay for use of your wheels, and so each car has hourly and daily prices that are established by the car’s owner. Prices will vary depending on the type of car, age of the car, use, and so on, though Wheelz contends that it is offering the cheapest solution on the market. (Also, users looking to rent for longer can also set up weekly share prices).  As to insurance, as soon as a user borrows a Wheelz car, they are covered by the startup’s million-dollar insurance policy for the entire time they’re using their car. And, according to Wheelz’s website, a user’s “personal auto insurance is in no way affected” by the startup’s coverage.  Some other nifty features? Wheelz is offering a pretty wide variety of cars, including sedans, hybrids, luxury cars, convertibles, vans, SUVs, and even a few trucks — plus, while you’re enjoying your Wheelz reservation, you’ll be able to take advantage of free, 24/7 customer support and roadside assistance.  Another piece that helps inspire confidence in the nascent startup is that it raised $2 million in seed funding, pre-launch, led by Chamath Palihaptiya, a former Facebook VP and early employee (who recently left to found the Social+Capital Partnership venture fund). Joining Palihapitiya are VC firms Felicis Ventures and Red Swan Ventures as well as an impressive list of angel investors, including Jim Freer, the former vice-chair of Ernst & Young, and Sebastien De Halleax, the founder of Playfish.   The Wheelz team also brings significant automotive experience to bear on their new venture, including founder and CEO Jeff Miller, who has spent the better part of the last three years focused on building sustainable transportation solutions, working for electric vehicle network provider Better Place. Furthermore, Akhtar Jameel, Wheelz Co-founder and CTO (and the architect behind Wheelz’ technology platform) was formerly the CEO of Mercedes-Benz R&D and has held senior product and technology positions at Daimler, Better Place and Xerox PARC. And, um, also of note? Jameel was awarded a Smithsonian Computer World Innovations gold medal for developing the world’s first Internet connected car back in 1997. Of course, this name-dropping doesn’t mean that Wheelz categorically predestined for success, they still need to offer a more trustworthy service than their competitors and avoid those Airbnb-type PR kerfuffles. The startup is aiming to get at the trust factor via the platform’s integration with Facebook Connect, so that students know who they’re renting their car to, seeing as they can access the social data of prospective car-sharers to make sure they’re actual people, not criminals recently out of Shawshank.  And though there’s certainly some interesting technology at play, Wheelz still has to kill the customer experience — or they will be headed to the startup deadpool in the sky just like everyone else. “Social is changing every industry in a profound way, and we believe this is the team that’s going to revolutionize the concept of car ownership, turning cars from financial burdens into opportunities”, Palihapitiya said. “I invested in Wheelz on the strength of the executive team and its thoughtful approach to building this business and bringing it to market.” For more on Wheelz, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ocean Group, a massive private holding company founded by entrepreneurs Timur Sardarov and Oliver Ripley, has announced the creation of – and a $100 million investment commitment in – a new digital media and technology subsidiary called Black Ocean.  Sardarov and Ripley will spearhead Black Ocean’s investments in video, social, mobile, and e-commerce technologies. The new subsidiary’s core business will comprise both a strategic holding division for the management of its portfolio companies (in which it usually holds a majority stake) and a business incubator that will offer “everything from capital to structural expertise to back office support” to entrepreneurs. Current Black Ocean companies include video encoding and streaming company Streamworks, video ad matching and rewards platform AdGenesis, MyCube, Shopflick and First Page Network. Black Ocean has offices in New York City, London, Luxembourg, Singapore, and Moscow. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Employee rewards services company Achievers, formerly known as I Love Rewards, has raised $24.5 million in a Series C round of financing led by Sequoia Capital, with earlier backers JLA Ventures, GrandBanks Capital and the Ontario Venture Capital Fund participating. The round brings the company’s total of funding raised to $38 million. Achievers targets organizations between 500 employees, up to Fortune 500 companies, looking to enhance employee engagement through social software.  Customers include Marriott, Deloitte, 3M and Microsoft. We’re told that the company is expanding at a rapid rate, experiencing 100+ percent employee growth year-over-year; they’re now at 150 employees in North America.  Achievers also just moved its US headquarters to San Francisco (from Toronto), along with its CEO Razor Suleman. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Parking In Motion has raised an undisclosed amount of capital in a Series A financing round co-led by IDG Ventures and Fontinalis Partners, the investment firm co-founded by William Clay “Bill” Ford Jr., the great-grandson of Henry Ford (and Executive Chairman of Ford Motor Company). The additional capital will allow Parking In Motion to deliver its real-time parking database to automobile navigation systems, mobile phones, tablets and other data aggregators. The company works with cities and private garage operators to direct drivers to available parking spaces across the US, Canada, and Europe. Parking In Motion taps into existing infrastructure such as smart parking meters, sensors, and parking gates, enabling it to inform drivers of occupancy and pricing information in real-time. Parking In Motion covers more than 25,000 parking locations in 500+ cities, 19 countries and 3 continents, including both on-street and off-street parking locations. The company currently delivers its information to users through its branded mobile apps and partnerships with navigation providers, mobile app developers and publishers, and other partners. Parking In Motion was co-founded by Sam Friedman and Alex Israel and is headquartered in Santa Monica, California. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mark Goines may not be the most familiar name in the Valley, but he was a prolific angel investor, investing in some 40 companies since 2000, including BabyCenter, Mint, PayCycle and Nolo.com. As Sarah reported in May, Goines is known for working closely with the startups he chooses to invest in, leveraging his consumer experience cred as GM of Intuit’s Consumer Division and VP of New Products at Charles Schwab to help founders take their companies to the next level.  In May, Morgenthaler Ventures snatched up the angel investor, and today Goines is leading his first investment with the VC firm in Fundly, a social fundraising site. The round, a $5 million series A, is Fundly’s second outside investment in 6 months, as the startup raised $2 million in seed back in late February. The series A brings the startup’s total funding to just under $8 million. Fundly’s existing seed investors, including Kapor Capital, Correlation Ventures, SeraphGroup, and Accelerator Ventures, also participated in the round. Goines, who had previously invested in Fundly as an angel investor, will be joining the startup’s board of directors.  “The team is awesome”, the new Morgenthaler Partner told VatorNews. “I was very impressed with the combination of skills in the company. Back when I made personal investments, I focused on two things: investing in a space that I really like and a team that I can work with and enjoy being around”.  Adding Goines to the board is a big win for Fundly, which is ramping up its social fundraising service in a space that already has some players with big-name recognition (like Causes.com, for example, which was founded by Sean Parker and Joe Green). To set itself apart from other online fundraising platforms, Fundly is targeting non-profit organizations rather than going after individuals themselves.  As a SaaS platform, the startup aims to give non-profits, like political campaigns and alumni offices at universities, for example, the tools to run their own social fundraising campaigns, leveraging Facebook, Twitter, and Linkedin (and p2p interaction) to encourage donors to become social advocates for their causes. Another big part of Fundly’s value proposition as SaaS is that it doesn’t require its non-profit clients to install any software, setup can take place in a couple of minutes, and users don’t pay any money up front — organizations only pay a small transaction fee as they earn money.  As part of this effort, Fundly offers a Facebook app that can be shared among your supporters, for example, allowing donors to compete with their friends to raise money for your cause, work to earn rewards, invite their friends, tell friends about support for cause, and give and receive virtual goods — all without leaving the comfortable confines of Facebook. Since launching in 2009, Fundly has attracted the likes of Meg Whitman, who raised more than $20 million on the service for her campaign for governor of California, TERI, and the Red Cross, as well as educational institutions including the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Communities In Schools, and the Silicon Valley Education Foundation. Teach For America and the LOFT Institute also recently launched a Fundly campaign to provide training and online resources for Latino teens who are working to improve their communities.  So far, the Kickstarter for not-for-profit fundraising has helped thousands of organizations in the U.S. raise over $220 million using their social media-integrated SaaS platform. And though non-profits in the U.S. raise over $300 billion a year, traditionally the process has been reserved for professional fundraisers, who target high net worth individuals to meet their goals.  With Fundly, your small urban cleanup non-profit can set up its own platform, and use the service’s sharable Facebook app to donors to encourage advocates to compete with their friends to raise money, work to earn rewards, invite their friends, and give and receive virtual goods. The startup is turning into an impressive service and with Goines on board (literally), it’s definitely become one to watch.  For more, check out Fundly at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In this, our third installment of “Free Startup Tools”, we wanted to highlight an agreement launched by Seedcamp, the European startup accelerator, to help startup founders negotiate the early stages of building a company. (You can check out our first post on The Founder Institute’s effort to standardize the founder-advisor relationship and compensation here and the second post on a tool that helps founders compare their term sheets to the standards here.)  While we’ve touched on these better ways to negotiate term sheets and relationships with advisors, founding a company also often entails bringing on co-founders to help you build your business. Of course, in doing so, it’s important for co-founders to be able to establish a level of trust that allows each founding member to fairly share in the benefits of success. To do so, Seedcamp (via its Seedhack initiative) is launching the “Seedhack Founder’s Collaboration Agreement”, which according to the initiative’s blog post, has been created to allow newly formed founding teams to “agree on what each founder’s shareholding stake should be” as well as codifying the amount of equity co-founders should receive in accordance with the level of time and effort they pour into the business. Readers can check out the PDF of the agreement here. As the accelerator said via its Seedhack blog, the intent with the collaboration agreement is to have it be of use to accelerators and incubators that hose events like Seedcamp’s Seedhack, where “collaboration is key”, as well as to the thousands of startups out there building businesses (and investing sweat equity) in those many ideas, products, and tools before officially creating a “formal” company or enterprise.   Seedcamp says that it wants co-founders to treat the document as fuel for discussion, which can either be used “as-is”, but it should be noted that it is still both a work in progress and a template which founders should modify as they see fit. (Hence the items in brackets, which are left up to founders to input their own language.) Note: The Seedhack Collaboration Founders Agreement is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License. Please feel free to share your impressions of the agreement, including whether or not readers believe that the vesting schedule proposed in the document applies generally or is more in line with hackathon-type scenarios. Excerpt image courtesy of Ideachampions.com Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInRies on Google+In the final episode of Chris Dixon’s interview with The Lean Startup author Eric Ries, Dixon asks him whether Google was “lean” when it rolled out Google+? Dixon says in some ways it appeared so, as Google was slowly “rolling out a bunch of different things, experimenting, versus let’s say Buzz and Wave.” Ries partially agrees but also replies “I still think they did a lot of unnecessary hype at the beginning and they kept reporting on their vanity metrics: ‘Now we’ve got 10 million users on Google+.’  That makes me really nervous.  How many engaged users are there?” Ries also believes that when brands become large it is harder to have an incremental rollout so bigger companies should “experiment under a different brand name in private, in some other market just to figure out, does the thing basically work before the press starts piling on.” As the two conclude, Dixon asks Ries what he thinks about the startup landscape. Ries feels the river of cash and founders flowing into the startup scene will eventually dry up, and references his post Winter Is Coming to illustrate the point. However, Ries believes this a good thing because the strong will survive. Separated from the boom/bust cycle Ries tells Dixon that at large, “a fundamental change is at work, I like calling it a startup movement.  I believe for the first time in history, entrepreneurship is now a viable career.” He compares it to “the birth of the management profession 100 years ago” and says, “a few decades from now entrepreneur will be a title that you can have on your business card, even if you work in a big company.” Make sure to watch episodes I II and III of this interview and past episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When social music startup Rexly launched at Disrupt NYC last May, we called it the social music discovery app that Ping should have been.  It shows you what your friends are listening to on iTunes, but filters the stream in an attempt to surface the best stuff.  Up until now, you had to log into Rexly’s site to experience it.  But today it is releasing its iPhone app, Music With Friends, which takes over your iPod player and incorporates all sorts of social features. As you listen to the songs and playlists on your iPhone, Rexly scrobbles them and they show up in a feed that your friends can see.  Similarly, you can see a feed of all the songs your friends are listening to who use Rexly, or the most popular songs overall.  But instead of just spitting out an unfiltered stream of the ost recent songs in your feed (although you can see that too), the default filter is Rexly’s “magic” stream.  It shows you songs from friends or other people you are following you’ve designated as super trustworthy in regards to their musical taste. The ability to tell the app which people you “Supertrust” is a way to get around the problem we already see in Facebook since the recent launch of music-sharing apps and its Ticker, which is overflowing with all of your friends bad Spotify music choices.  (Facebook addresses this issue with its own Music Dashboard).  Just because they are your friends, does not mean they have good taste in music.  Rexly lets you pick which of the people you follow you trust, and highlights their listening stream. For every song in your stream, you can listen to a 30-second sample, give it a thumbs up or a thumbs down (which further trains Rexly’s algorithm) or leave a comment.  You can also share the song on Twitter or Facebook.  Ping, which launched with no social sharing features outside of iTunes, now only lets you share on Twitter.  Until Apple and Facebook resolve their differences, Rexly is positioning itself as a bridge between the two. Rexly’s biggest drawback, however, is the 30-second sample.  It really isn’t competing against iTune’s native Ping feature more than it is against all of the new social music apps on Facebook (Spotify, MOG, Rdio, etc.).  They allow you to listen to the full song when a friend shares it (at least for anyone who is a subscriber to one of the services—and even if you are not, Spotify is giving away free 6 month trials).  But that is more an obstacle set up by the music industry than Rexly.  If all of these new music sharing apps actually result in more sales for the labels, they might finally take down that barrier.  And Rexly plans to add your friends’ activities on Pandora, Spotify, Rdio and other music streaming services so it will be able to piggyback on their efforts as well. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Peak Games, a social gaming company that designs titles that target emerging markets in Turkey, the Middle East, North Africa, and South America, is making some significant announcements today, including acquisitions, partnerships, funding, and snapshot of the company’s continuing growth.  For starters, the company announced today that it has closed an $11.5 million series B round of funding, led by existing European venture investors Earlybird Venture Capital and Hummingbird Ventures. This latest infusion of capital brings the startup’s total investment to $19 million. According to the Peak Games team, the round will be used to continue expanding into emerging markets, to complete game studio acquisitions, and ramp up hiring and user acquisition.  Along with its funding announcement, Peak Games is today sharing the news that it has made two strategic acquisitions in the past few months, acquiring hardcore strategy game studios, Umaykut and Erlikhan, in an effort to continue bringing emerging markets (both studios are Turkish) to social gaming. Sidar Sahin, CEO of Peak Games, says in reference to Peak’s acquisitions, that one (among many) of the reasons the startup is focusing on core games is high ARPU and profitability. “The core games we’re running see up to $0.30 to 0.40 daily ARPUs”, Sahin says, “which is 10 to 20 times higher than resource management or casual games, for example”. Founded in 2010, Peak Games has sought to both develop its own intellectual property, with games like Okey and TrendKiz as well as to partner with other big social game developers, like RockYou, which created Zoo World 2, The Broth (creators of Barn Buddy), and MagnetJoy (Pet Party), to create and publish versions of their games aimed at local, foreign markets.     Because of its international focus, much of Peak Games’ early growth came thanks to games based on traditional Turkish and Arabic card and board games (like Okey, which is Turkey’s most popular online social game with 4.5 million monthly active users), but the company’s recent moves aim to make it more broadly applicable, both to hardcore gamers (with Umaykut) and to female gamers with titles like TrendKiz. And grow it has: Peak Games currently reaches over 16 million monthly active users, according to AppData, up from 10 million MAU in May, and has grown to the sixth largest social gaming company in the world.  As Turkey has become the fourth largest Facebook market, with over 30 million users (which represents over 87 percent of the online population), and as the market in the Middle East and North Africa continues to adopt Facebook and social networking at a breakneck pace (with the region expected to reach 250 million users by 2015), Peak Games seems well poised to take advantage of this burgeoning market.  By creating a portfolio of games available in the region’s local languages and are tailored to its cultures — along with its plan to bring social games to mobile platforms in these mobile markets, Peak Games is setting itself up to be the envy of the social gaming giants like Zynga and EA, which have predominantly U.S.-based user bases. The U.S. social gaming market may be nearing saturation, and if this proves to be the case, Peak is off to a serious head start, especially considering the headway it has made in the Middle East. The company is still far behind wooga, which has over 35 million monthly active users and is well-established in the European gaming market, but the future certainly looks bright. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Formspring is adding support for photos to its Q&A service in an update the company is touting as the biggest in the nearly two years since its launch. With the addition, Formspring users will be able to post a photo both when asking a question or when providing a response. The new feature comes on the heels of several other rollouts for the company, including its official iPhone application launched two weeks ago, and other new sharing features involving profile pictures. Upon arrival, the iPhone app also included support for posting photos with questions, but that same feature was not available to Formspring’s online users. With today’s revamp, all of the company’s 26+ million users can post photos, whether they’re mobile or not. To use the feature, you can opt to upload photos from your computer or you can access your PC’s webcam to take a new picture. It’s a minor but much-needed addition for a site that’s now competing with the likes of Quora, not to mention the pageview-generating giant that is Tumblr. Both Quora and Tumblr support photos (and have for some time), but in slightly differently ways than Formspring. Quora lets you enhance questions and answers with photos, but discourages the use of photos solely as a way to add “visual interest” to your items. Meanwhile, Tumblr supports photos in questions, through its “Ask Me Anything” feature, but not in answers. It does, however, offer optional “photo replies” for blog posts. Formspring says the new feature will rollout today, sometime after 10:15 AM PST.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Put one big, fat candle on the cake. One year ago today, a startup named CloudFlare launched on stage at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco, where the startup placed second to Qwiki. (You can read our initial coverage here.) For those unfamiliar with CloudFlare, the startup offers a free service designed to not only boost the speed of your company’s website but also protect it from those nefarious web-born threats that hamper load times and just generally make IT guys grumble. Not a sexy product, but one that’s necessary and integral to the success of web businesses. To give a quick snapshot of how appealing this service is to eBusinesses: 365 days after launch, CloudFlare is now powering over 100,000 websites, with more than 5 percent of those seeing over 1.5 million monthly page views. From zero traffic to today powering a host of websites that see a collective 15 billion page views per month and more than 350 million unique visitors, CloudFlare apparently has a fairly significant silver lining.  What’s more, the startup quietly raised $20 million in November from NEA, Venrock, and Pelion (and told no press for six months) and in June of this year, the startup saw members of international, swashbuckling hacker syndicate, Lulzsec, sign up for its service. And all this with virtually no down-time. As CloudFlare aims to silence the threats to performance and security for large and small web properties, in celebration of its first birthday, the startup is launching a new feature that has implications for both. As some are aware, ye olde Internets have been built on IPv4, literally the fourth version (or revision) in the development of Internet Protocol — the very addressing and routing communication standards that make the Internet the Internet.  IPv4 was developed in the 1970s, standardized in ’81, and is still widely deployed, yet it only has the capacity for about 4 billion devices to connect to the network, according to CloudFlare CEO Matthew Prince. As IPv4 runs out of space, the world’s web users will be forced (mostly unknowingly) to IPv6, a new standard that is still young and is incompatible with its predecessor.  The solution, says Prince, is a gateway, but typical gateway solutions are hardware-based, sold by companies like Cisco, and cost a boatload. So, today, CloudFlare is launching an IPv6 gateway that doesn’t require site owners to buy hardware, software, or change their existing infrastructure (i.e. a single line of code). And it’s free for CloudFlare customers. Of course, this doesn’t take companies completely off the hook. Businesses will still have to upgrade their infrastructure in the future to support IPv6, but CloudFlare’s “Gateway” buys them time, allowing them to upgrade on their own schedule — as budgets allow.  According to Prince, more than 10,000 sites participated in the private beta of CloudFlare’s Gateway, which effectively doubled the number of websites that are available via IPv6. The CEO anticipates that, with its roster of 100,000 websites, many of those companies will take advantage of the free upgrade, potentially increasing the total number of websites now on the IPv6 web by tenfold. CloudFlare’s launch of its gateway could prove to be a valuable testing ground for the new standard, providing valuable insight for the inevitable future changeover.  Sounding like a typical founder with outsized vision (and tongue no doubt in cheek), Prince said that the CloudFlare team takes solace in the fact that the startup is doing its part “to save the Internet”. That remains to be seen, but with Lulzsec as one of its customers, I’m sure few will be eager to disagree. For a snapshot of CloudFlare’s evolution to “Internet Saver/Superhero” (grain of salt needed), see the infographic below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Two weeks ago, we covered Chomp‘s news that it will be powering app search on Verizon’s app store for all Android phones. Today, the app search early player is announcing some more big news, and this time advertisers and developers are the ones who stand to benefit.  Launching in private beta today is “Chomp Search Ads”, a new program that will allow developers to bid on the keywords or phrases that will deliver their ads to users who search for those terms within an app search engine. The ad engine then matches app ads to the most relevant potential customer based on what apps they’re currently searching, making ads less annoying and more relevant for the consumer and ideally more lucrative for developers. During the early stage of its private beta, Chomp will be opening up its search ad engine to a select group of advertisers, with Milk and Zaarly being two of the first companies to participate.  “Being able to advertise the Oink app to people that are in the process of looking for something just like it is a form of targeting we haven’t seen before”, says Milk (and Digg) founder Kevin Rose. For advertisers and developers, this additional targeting is absolutely huge. Just consider the market. As Erick reported back in January, according to Gartner, $893 million was spent on app advertising in 2010, with total app revenue predicted to skyrocket to $50 billion by 2014 — up to $20 billion of which is likely to be spent on advertising in apps.  And what’s even more relevant to app search engines like Chomp? Over 200 million iOS and Android users search for apps every month. Needless to say, if the ad engine’s implementation goes smoothly and matching is up to par, this could be a huge move for Chomp, potentially encouraging developers (who spend 20 to 30 percent of app revenues on marketing etc.) to come flocking.    As to how it will work? Like Google’s AdWords, Chomp Search Ads will be an auction-based service, in which developers set up an account and pre-fill the account with ad dollars. At which point Chomp will “recommend search terms and developers can bid for those keywords, setting a daily maximum spend as well as a maximum bid price for a given keyword or phrase”, according the Chomp’s release. Chomp will then show ads based on bid price and relevancy, with developers’ accounts being charged only when users click on the ad through a “Get It” button. And, just like Google does for web advertising, the startup will provide users with campaign reporting and analytics to measure the effectiveness of their ad dollars. The value proposition here is potentially very high, as traditional app advertising has not been up to speed with web advertising, rarely accounting for the delivered ad’s relevance to the consumer. Much of app display advertising fails to deliver meaningful results, and many developers have shied away from integrating advertising into their apps for this very reason. It just wasn’t worth the money. But if Chomp can live up to its promise, this could be a big win for developers, consumers, and, well, Chomp. The startup’s search ads are available in private beta at ads.chomp.com here.     What’s more, the app search engine is complementing the announcement of its search ad functionality with the launch of a redesigned app for the iPhone, complete with a new interface and bringing the features that will go live with Verizon’s app store like the ability to discover new apps based on keywords, types, and categories — not just by name search. Chomp for iPhone’s new design features a prominent search box that integrates Google’s now-taken-for-granted implementation of realtime search. Meaning that, from the moment the user types a letter into the search bar on their phone, Chomp’s new search begins automatically displaying results. The results will also now display large “app cards” that include the app’s name, price, review rating and a “Get It” button, according to Chomp Co-founder Ben Keighran, providing a natural way for users to get a basic sense of the app and its relevance to their search. Chomp’s home screen will also include top ten suggested search terms based on what’s trending (while displaying preview icons of those apps), as well as five user-recommended topic titles that can be searched based on category and a “Related Searches” feature. Look out app search engines, Chomp’s addition of search advertising and enhancement of its search functionality across its platforms are moving it ever closer to becoming the Google of app search engines, and ever farther away from being the AltaVista. For more, check out Chomp on iTunes here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Luxury home decor flash sale site HomeSav.com this morning announced that it has raised $1.2 million in seed financing from multiple retail angel investors and entrepreneurs including the Koffler family and the Metrick family (founders and owners of Canada’s largest high-end home furniture retailer). In addition, HomeSav.com says it has grown its membership by over 1,400 percent in the first year to over 100,000 registered users in the United States and Canada. Its members are said to place over 100 orders per day. HomeSav.com was founded in 2010 by Alexander Norman, Aliza Pulver and Allan Fisch. The site competes with the likes of One Kings Lane, The Foundary, Fab.com and Amazon’s MyHabit. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Wikets, Inc., a young social commerce startup, announced today that it has raised $1.5 million in seed funding from venture firms Andreessen Horowitz and Battery Ventures, as well as from six angel investors, including Robert Davoli of Sigma Partners. The startup will use its seed capital, says Wikets co-founder and CEO Andy Park, to ramp up hiring and prepare for the release of its eponymous iPhone app, which will reward users for providing and sharing recommendations on products and places to their friends — while on the go.  From this brief description, Wikets may sound a little bit like a game-ified rewards system overlaid on, say, Yelp. While the Wikets team is not yet sharing all the details of the app’s UX — as the team is busy putting the finishing touches on the app ahead of its expected release date in early October — nut, to be sure, Wikets is more than a Yelp with badges, designed instead around social commerce, around helping users discover and connect with like-minded people based on shared favorite places and products.   The social graph is becoming (if it hasn’t always been) the source of our most trusted recommendations; while Netflix’s impressive recommendation engine relies on a complex concoction of algorithms, and other familiar services might prefer similar machine-enabled (or hybrid) recommendation systems, it’s hard to argue against good old human curation and friendsourced recommendations. Especially for the very simple reason that they come from those we trust — people who know who we are, what tastes and preferences define us, or what makes us tick.  Park identifies this trend in many people: When a friend takes one up on a recommendation, they are inherently showing trust in that suggestion, and by extension showing trust in us, so Wikets is therefore designed to reward friends for offering valuable, actionable recommendations on products and places (as well as the ability to discover like-minded strangers who will have the possibility to become  trusted sources themselves).  The co-founder says that the application will combine the social graph with friend filters and geolocation as the foundation for those trustworthy recommendations. And, instead of simply becoming a mobile scrapbook for people to add photos of products or favorite places, Wikets will offer (through various partnerships with retailers, etc.) a full, searchable database so that users can focus on suggesting products and places they love to people who will likely feel the same way.  Wikets will allow users to connect directly with each other, share preferences, and receive updates via email et al on what their trusted sources are recommending. Then, when another user takes one’s suggestion, both are then rewarded with points. Once users accumulate a certain number of points, they will become eligible to receive real prizes. At this point, Park says, those prizes will likely take the form of gift cards. Yet, as the iPhone app will be free (made-for iPad and Android apps are next on the agenda, by the way), Wikets will need to keep its eye on the formulation of a killer business model. Although the team has yet to solidify its plans for monetization, likely revenue will come in the form of taking a cut when a user’s recommendation turns into an actual purchase, be it of a product, a hotel room, for example.  Wikets can also become an attractive platform for brands looking to find, connect with, and leverage their most loyal customers and passionate advocates, and likely the types of prizes Wikets will offer down the road might come in the form of featured products offered by partnering brands. Be that as it may, Park reiterated that Wikets is keen on making sure that its “social” components will not simply manifest in the old cut-and-paste Facebook and Twitter integration. While users will be able to blast product recommendations out via their favorite social networks, look for the app’s social features to center around how it will use one’s preferences and location to identify the things they like while they’re on the move (and perhaps in a store) and connect them with people who have similar interests nearby to offer realtime, pertinent recommendations. For those not standing in the aisle of a retail outlet, users will of course be able to go buy those products from retailers’ digital stores, right from the app.  As to who is behind Wikets? The startup was founded by Andy Park, Vijay Manwani, and Ravi Reddy, who formerly built data center software provider BladeLogic, which was sold to BMC Software in 2008 a year after its IPO. Stay tuned for more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Delicious is back. Million dollar question is not: will you use the revamped social bookmarking service? But rather, will your mom, sister, and that dorky teenage kid from across the street use it? As you may have heard, Delicious was saved from Yahoo’s incompetent hands by AVOS, the new startup created by YouTube founders Chad Hurley and Steve Chen, in April 2011. Today, AVOS is relaunching Delicious, which they say was “rebuilt from the ground up”. In an interview with AllThingsD, Hurley says Delicious is a great brand that “belongs in Silicon Valley”.  Whatever that means, their mission will be to make Delicious popular among people that couldn’t care less about Silicon Valley but want to discover great content on the Web all the same. (What if Twitter, Facebook and Google+ already solved that particular problem adequately?) On the new Delicious website, you’ll find little references to ‘bookmarking’ as such. Rather, the revamped service aims to sway users into saving and sharing ‘stacks’ of online content with others. A stack is a collection of links built around a common theme or topic that can be shared in full with other users, enabling easy and swift discovery of online content by cutting through the noise. AVOS calls said stacks ‘playlists for the Web’, which I think is an apt metaphor. Also new: multi-word tags (e.g. “TechCrunch rocks”) and media previews. And wave goodbye to ‘network’, ‘fans’ and ‘subscriptions’, because the new Delicious is adopting the ‘Following’ concept we’ve learned to love thanks to Twitter, Facebook and other popular services. If you used to be a Delicious user and would like to know what the transition means for you, go check out this support thread (particularly the last item). Note that this is merely the first iteration; from the sound of it, AVOS has bigger plans for Delicious.  Anyhoo, screenshots (and demo video)!     Latest headlines delivered to you daily For baseball fans, that magical month is almost afoot. October: The time in which we look on, annoyed, as our favorite team heads to Florida to play golf, or stumbles, gets injured, and whimpers quietly out of the playoffs. It’s a testy time for most, but still one most of us would never miss. Another thing baseball fans have likely noticed: Moneyball — a book written about the Oakland A’s general manager Billy Beane and his use of sabermetrics and other newfangled ways of keeping tabs on which players are undervalued, etc. — has been made into a film and is being shown in theaters nationwide. For those unfamiliar with any of the above, the reason this is of interest to baseball fans? Moneyball highlighted a then ongoing re-conception of what metrics and methods teams and organizations use to evaluate players. Thanks to Moneyball and the ascendancy of Bill James and his sabermetrics, geeks were finally able to secure a place in the clubhouse. I haven’t yet seen Moneyball, but it’s on my towering list of things to do this week, to be sure. So, in the spirit of a close wild card race, the encroaching playoffs, and the release of Moneyball, here’s a cool new app for iOS called Baseball Mobile that is, simply put, a fast and easy way to get baseball stats on your iOS devices. Now, stats geeks can go mobile. With authority. The reason I’m excited about this app? It was created with the casual fan and the advanced stats geek in mind, which means that it includes both traditional stats (hits, RBIs, batting average, etc.) as well as sabermetric stats (OPS, FIP, wOPS+) for every player and team going back to the 1870s. It’s also updated daily for 2011 season and will be updated for this year’s playoffs as well.   Baseball Mobile’s data is all stored within the app, too, which means that you can open new pages and run search queries instantly, whether you’re on an airplane or suffering from AT&T’s service.  Sure, there are tons of sites out there on the web that offer a wealth of baseball stats, but they can be hard to find for the casual baseball fan, and many of those sites aren’t optimized for mobile. Plus, who wants to own another ESPN app? It’s nice to be using something made by an independent developer that has no affiliation with the Disney-owned death star of sports media. The app is a great way for average fans, fantasy buffs, stats geeks, and players themselves to easily swipe through current and historical stats — and it’s a great way to win a bar bet with Tony, who thinks that he knows everything about Carl Yastrzemski’s statistics in the ’67 season.  And, hey, even Manny Acta, the Cleveland Indians’ manager, seems to like the app: Baseball Mobile on iphone is awesome. What a great app! — Manny Acta (@MannyActa14) September 12, 2011  And apparently so does Heath Bell. Bill James’ Daily Matchups is another app out there that has some similar use cases, but Baseball Mobile wins because it will present stats in your favorite format, do so on a team-by-team or player-by-player basis, and the app doesn’t have friction when you choose a new team’s stats because all the info is right there in the app. Users can also switch between regular stats and sabermetric stats by simply swiping the player’s profile without having to return to the main page. Pretty cool. As to who’s responsible for this app? Mike Gilberg is a first-time iOS developer, so users may notice that the design isn’t exactly perfect. There’s plenty of room left for improvement, but that doesn’t mean that this isn’t app isn’t an awesome primer for baseball fans heading into the playoffs.  It also happens that Gilberg has both served as a ballboy for the New York Metropolitans and worked in the organization’s operations department, building and applying advanced stats — some of which have made it into this very Baseball Mobile app. Thus, what Gilberg may lack in app development experience, he makes up for in familiarity with the geeky world of baseball statistics. And if there’s any sport that is stat-centric, baseball is it. So check it out and let us know what you think, baseball fans. Oh, and Android is on its way. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In honor of President Obama’s LinkedIn town hall meeting today — and the impending campaign — we bring you a political startup. Before you gag, give it a chance; I think this is a political startup that might just get your vote. Launching today is Ruck.us: A social and political engagement platform that allows like-minded individuals to find each other, connect, and to take collective action based on issues, not political affiliations.  On the surface, that doesn’t sound particularly earth-shattering. We’re pretty sure both Facebook and Twitter enable this kind of grouping — as does Fox News and MSNBC (and No Labels and Americans Elect). But it does help that the Ruck.us co-founders both have politics in their blood: Ray Glendening is the son of former Maryland Gov. Parris Glendening and Nathan Daschle is the son of former Senate Majority Leader Tom Daschle. Naturally, both guys have been involved with the democratic party professionally, having recently worked for the Democratic Governors Association. However, in a move that will likely strike a chord with many people, both young and old, Glendening and Daschle have since effectively given up on political parties, because, as they told Roll Call, “the two parties have simply failed to keep pace with today’s world”. Sounds about right.   The idea is not just to be antiestablishment or people without a country, but that the two-party system is a somewhat limiting mold for the U.S.’s diverse population and the nuanced nature of many people’s political views. The population is becoming increasingly idea and issue-centric, and the social media generation wants to feel connected and, at the same time, take advantage of customization, personalization — not to be force-fed cookie cutter antidotes. Of course, this sounds like the rhetoric of many-a-democratic candidate in the past, candidates that often go on to forget those values once they get to Washington. The principle motivation behind Ruck.us, then, is to bring people together around collective action, no matter what party or ideas they ascribe to.   In practice, this means that Ruck.us users simply visit the site, sign up, and select the issues that are relevant to them individually — whether that’s one issue or 25. As the user pokes around the site and responds to the user-generated questions they come across, the platform serves the user with a “Ruck”, which is the 50, 100, or 250 people (the size is elastic) that share the same viewpoints. The Ruck then constantly changes as the site learns more about the user and their political DNA.  Next, the site establishes a communication feed, in which users can see what their Ruck is discussing, what links and stories they’re sharing, etc., as well as what your group is doing — the actions they’re taking, petitions they’re signing, who they’re donating to, and so on. Again, the focus here is on issues rather than political parties. The idea, Glendening told TechCrunch, is to replicate those core party functions, outside of the two parties, just as Obama for America and the Tea Party paved the way for external organization during the last election. Technology provided the two groups (at great long last) with the ability to so, and Glendening says that, with Ruck.us, they hope to enhance that functionality and take it one step farther.  While there are a slew of non-profits out there seeking to organize people around ideas and causes, Ruck.us is certainly different in that it’s a startup, and it’s definitely for-profit. That being said, Glendening was adamant about avoiding an advertising-supported business model, especially one that would rely on annoying banner ads.  The startup has received a small round of venture funding, but the co-founder said that sponsored actions (if a person indicates they are an environmentalist, then they might benefit from being served with the Sierra Club petition that’s currently before Congress, for example) as well as partnerships.  And on that latter note, Students First, LiveStrong, and Rock the Vote are all currently partnering with Ruck.us in the hopes of using it as a channel to reach their target audience. While Ruck.us is founded on an idea that many people can relate to (finding a place to congregate around causes that speak to them, outside of party demarcations and agendas), it’s true that many politically-conscious and active people already have plenty of places to express their views and get in touch with people who think the same way. It remains to be seen if, without a target, specific audience, Ruck.us will be able to gain the traction it needs to become a valuable resource. But the idea itself is definitely worth testing. For more, visit Ruck.us at home here or check out the video below:What is Ruck.us from Ruck.us on Vimeo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Piston Cloud Computing, Inc. is today emerging from stealth and introducing its new enterprise-ready cloud operating system for private clouds called pentOS. The new OS is built on OpenStack, the open source IaaS cloud computing project that now has over 1,450 contributors and 110 participating companies, including NASA, Rackspace, Citrix, Intel, Cisco, Arista Networks, Microsoft and Dell. With pentOS (Piston Enterprise OSTM), the focus is on the private cloud environment, an area which has been somewhat neglected in today’s OpenStack landscape. The new OS addresses enterprise’s most pressing concerns, including security, compliance and integration with existing systems. For starters, unlike OpenStack, which is a cloud automation layer, not an operating system, pentOS is bare metal up, built on a hardened Linux distro that doesn’t include anything expect what’s required to run OpenStack. It also includes the industry’s first implementation of CloudAudit, a cross-industry standard launched in early 2010 to automate the process of auditing cloud service providers, and which has become the security standard for OpenStack. In addition, pentOS comes with Piston CloudKey, essentially a USB stick that lets you edit a single config file to make changes to a private cloud. When you’re ready to deploy those changes, just pop the USB key into a switch, and the switch will automatically install the software to the servers. It’s a 99.99% automated, hand-free installation, says Piston Cloud.  PentOS is based on open standards and is designed to be vendor agnostic. It supports a variety of switches and servers. At present, Arista switches are supported, but those from HP and Force10 will be supported soon. It can also run alongside other public or private cloud environments, including those from Rackspace, Dell, Amazon, Internap, Korea Telecom and more. The software will be available as a preview starting October 3rd, and will become commercially available on November 29th. Licensing will be on a per server basis and subscription packages will include annual support. Pricing has yet to be determined. Piston Cloud’s CEO and Co-founder, Joshua McKenty, was technical lead and cloud architect of NASA’s Nebula Cloud Computing Platform, which formed the cornerstone of the OpenStack project. He currently holds an appointed seat on the OpenStack Project Policy Board. Meanwhile, Piston Cloud’s CTO and Co-founder Christopher MacGown was technical lead at Slicehost, acquired by Rackspace in 2008. The company raised $4.5 million in Series A funding back in July, in a round led by Hummer Winblad and True Ventures, with Divergent Ventures and others participating. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, Morgenthaler Ventures, the 40-year-old Sand Hill Road VC firm wrapped up its “DC to VC Startup Showcase”, a nationwide contest geared towards finding the most promising young health tech startups. From nearly 200 applicants, the pool was whittled down to eleven finalists, which presented to an invite-only crowd of VCs, angel investors and entrepreneurs. The companies were then categorized according to whether they were seeking seed funding or looking to raise their series A.  The live audience of over 350 health tech enthusiasts, as well as those watching on live stream, put the finishing touch on the months-long competition, selecting the winners (after commentary from a panel of VC and entrepreneurial judges). The winner of the seed round contest was EyeNetra, an affordable, mobile diagnostic tool for our eyes, and Jiff Inc (a recent TechCrunch Disrupt finalist) took top prize in the series A flight with its HIPAA-compliant iPad platform for patient communication and education. Of course, while there were two winners, the DC to VC audience chose from a group of strong finalists. For more on those finalists, check out the quick blurbs below as well as the video of presentations at the end. Seed Finalists: Careticker is the world’s first platform that helps patients plan in advance for a hospital or outpatient procedure.  Skimble powers the mobile wellness movement with a cross-platform ecosystem of fun and dynamic coaching applications. Its latest title, Workout Trainer, ranks Top 10 in the free Healthcare & Fitness category on iPhone/iPad. SurgiChart is a mobile, cloud-based, social-clinical network for surgeons to exchange relevant perioperative, case-centric information. TeleThrive provides patients an instant connection to doctors for a medical consultation using any telephone or computer with complete audio and video conferencing.  Viewics provides hospitals with cloud-based analytics and business intelligence solutions which enable them to drive enhanced operational, financial and clinical outcomes.   Series-A Finalists: AbilTo develops and delivers online mental health programs to managed care members and enterprise workforces that help reduce payor costs while improving overall health outcomes. Axial Exchange moves healthcare organizations towards pay-for-performance, enabling providers to coordinate care and measure clinical quality across disparate settings. Empower Interactive’s online services deliver proven psychotherapy methodologies via an e-learning platform to greatly improve the economics and accessibility of mental and behavioral health solutions. YourNurseIsOn.com employs bi-directional text, phone and email communications to help hospitals and agencies put “the right healthcare providers, in the right places, right now.” And … The Winners:  Hailing from MIT Media Labs, EyeNetra is developing an eye diagnostic tool for mobile phones that will allow anyone (with minimal training) to take an eye test, receive a diagnostic measurement, and access eye care, all with the touch of a button. According to EyeNetra Founder David Schafran, of the 4 billion people who need glasses in the world today, over half of them don’t have access to eye care — or glasses. Not to mention, the patient experience at eye doctors is less than fun, and eye diagnostic tools tend to be archaic, expensive, require trained professionals to use, and are big and bulky.  So EyeNetra wants to empower patients and those in need of glasses by providing them with a low-cost eye test and options for care accessible from anywhere. At any time. EyeNetra thus offers a smartphone app and a cheap eyepiece that can be attached to a phone with ease to perform a simple alignment test, in minutes allowing the user to receive a refractive assessment for nearsightedness, farsightedness, astigmatism, etc. What’s more, the company is seeking to offer on-demand eye care, through an eye care network at which the company will sit at the center, brokering between patients and eye care providers, vendors, and service providers.  According to their presentation, “From ‘store-and-forward your electronic prescription’ to ‘personalized prevention and treatment services’, and ‘access and recruit new patients'”, the startup is looking to create an ecosystem of “value-added services” that will enable “whole new businesses”. EyeNetra is also looking to build a solution that includes a suite of eye care devices; it has already developed a cataracts diagnostic and will soon have retina diagnostics, as it works toward building a “medkit” that people can have at home or community health care workers can have in the field.    Jiff, the inbox for healthcare, was founded by James Currier, a serial entrepreneur who co-founded WonderHill, a social gaming company, and Tickle, which became the world’s largest self-assessment company, registering 100 million people and was  acquired by Monster.com in 2004. Currier currently co-runs Ooga Labs, an investment and incubation company in Palo Alto. You may remember the JiffPad as a TechCrunch Disrupt 2011 winner. It’s just that good. Read our full coverage here.  But what is Jiff? Jiff is an iPad app that gives doctors and physicians the ability to create effective and memorable “teaching moments” right in front of patients, just as they might with a wall poster or anatomical model.  Teaching materials, explanations, gestures, and patients’ questions can be preserved and subsequently emailed to patients after consultations. The medical teaching tool brings the wonder of mobile technology into the doctor’s office, giving patients the opportunity to receive more effective and memorable explanations and diagnoses, while doctors have the satisfaction of knowing that their explanations of ailments and treatments are understood in a visual, interactive way.  The JiffPad is aimed at helping improve healthcare communication and curing the doctor-patient relationship of misunderstanding and miscommunication.  For more on the finalists, click over to YouTube for videos of all the finalists. Excerpt image courtesy of Hook Surgery Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve always hated the notion of ratings based on five stars. It makes no sense. Sure, something that sucks is “1 star” and something awesome is “5 stars”, but what determines a “2 star” rating? What about a “4 stars”? It’s totally arbitrary. Why not just say something is “bad”, “okay”, “good”, or “great”? Or better yet, why not say nothing unless something is great? That’s the basic idea behind Stamped, a new startup currently in stealth mode. The startup has deep Google ties — 2 of the 3 co-founders are ex-Google, while 4 of the 7 total team members are — but it’s iPhone-only for now. They’re taking the Instagram-approach to launching in that regard. And they’re taking cues from Instagram in another key regard: simplicity. “It can be hard to figure out what a 3-star rating from 70 strangers means. We want to introduce simplicity back into the system by reducing it all down to one question: does it deserve your friend’s stamp of approval?,” co-founders and CEO Robby Stein says. “Every decision we’ve made has been designed to make the act of stamping as fast and simple as possible,” he continues. I love everything about those statements. And Stein goes further: “We’re obsessively focused on building a social platform designed for quality over quantity.  There is so much value in discovering great things through your friends and too much noise on current platforms to do it easily. We want to change that.” When it launches, Stamped will be entering an already-crowded space around mobile-based ratings. This reminds me of Instagram launching a year ago just as a plethora of mobile photo startups were launching. Simplicity and speed won the day. Stamped is hoping it plays out the same way for them. Stein notes that he’s been obsessing over this idea for a few years, but started on it in earnest in April when he left Google (where he worked on Gmail and more recently, Ad Exchange). “I saw that people loved to talk about the things they liked best over coffee, emails, texts, or even massive Google spreadsheets (I swear my friend has one). I noticed this is information people are naturally drawn to sharing, so I started with building a prototype that made this easier and more efficient,” he says. There are a few other unique layers to the app, to avoid what the team calls “data diarrhea”. More on that when the app is ready to launch. The startup, which is entirely New York City-based right now, raised a Series A round of funding from Bain Capital Ventures and Google Ventures earlier this year. The amount is undisclosed. Look for Stamped to launch in the next few weeks. For now, you can sign up to learn more on their site. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At some point in the game, every entrepreneur and startup founder becomes familiar with the term sheet. But “familiarity” can be a tricky qualifier. Even by one’s third startup, entrepreneurs are not always fully aware of the ins and outs of every term on a term sheet, or how to properly value their company. Just ask GRP Partner Mark Suster.  What’s more, there’s the legalese and the anxiety that VCs might sneak in some tricky terms — which all work towards making the process a confusing pain in the ass. No one wants to get duped, and entrepreneurs are always looking for better ways to compare term sheets with others in the space to get a sense of how founder-friendly terms are, what language should be agreed to, which should be negotiated, etc. There are some great resources out there for entrepreneurs looking for information on term sheets: See this Quora entry that includes responses from Suster and many other VCs for a quick snapshot. But, today, we’ve found another tool that should be of great use to entrepreneurs, brought to our attention by entrepreneur and former corporate attorney Ehren Brav.  Brav, his company Greenline Legal, and Joe Wallin, an IP and startup attorney at the law firm of Davis Wright Tremaine and host of StartupLawBlog (who is also the founder of the Startup Trivia iPhone and Android app Erick wrote about), have teamed up to create a tool that allows founders to compare the provisions of term sheets side-by-side with a number of widely recognized standards. Many VCs and angels use the National Venture Capital Association’s template for agreements and term sheets for series A and B rounds as well as Y Combinator’s open source term sheet for seed and series A deals, for example.  Wallin’s Greenline Legal is the company behind the cloud-based software that enables lawyers and business people to compare and summarize disparately formatted legal docs in such a way as to clear out the noise and confusing language and highlights the important differences between documents. The Term Sheet Comparison tool, said Wallin, is the first public launch of the company’s software, and it’s a pretty cool way to start out, as it allows entrepreneurs to quickly (and instantly) see how a term sheet compares to models like that of NCVA and Y Combinator. For those interested in a more technical description, Greenline applies machine learning alogirthms to “identify, extract, and categorize legal language, pulling out and matching up the comparable provisions”, according to Wallin’s StartupLawBlog.  The software tool then juxtaposes your provisions with those of the models to easily show the differences in language. The team said that they will be adding additional model term sheets in the coming weeks, but the tool as it is currently is already a great way for founders to focus on critical issues in comparison with market norms, better understand the terms in oftentimes complicated deals, and become a better negotiator.  The better you understand the terms, the more likely you are to help navigate your company’s way to a favorable term sheet and mind-blowing success. To check it out for yourself, click over to StartupLawBlog, or see the video below:  Excerpt image courtesy of Cayenne Consulting Latest headlines delivered to you daily Launching this week at Health 2.0 is a startup called, WellnessFX, which offers a simple value proposition: It wants to help average people take charge of their health. As the medical industry expands daily and more and more health and wellness data is driven online, it’s become increasingly difficult for people to collect, organize, manage, and interpret their own medical data — to both make decisions regarding their health and see actual results. WellnessFX was founded in April 2010 and raised $1.85 million in seed funding from Voyager Capital and FLOODGATE (as well as a handful of other angels) the following November. Since then, the startup has been in stealth, flying under the radar, iterating, testing, and becoming HIPAA compliant.  The startup has a service that allows consumers and wellness experts to measure, understand, and improve their health by combining the latest advances in medical science with social media tools, and a smooth consumer UX.  Essentially, the team has created another Mint.com of health, putting it in the same space as Cake Health and Simplee, which are attacking the same goal. Though each differs slightly in its approach (and WellnessFX takes a more holistic approach), it’s a testament to the growing demand for online healthcare management — and what a pain in the ass current services have become.  How? First off, WellnessFX, like so many other healthcare startups, wants to offer consumers a preventative tool rather than something that only treats illnesses and ailments once they arise. With the growing affordability of diagnostic mechanisms (a nod to WebMD?), the platform gives users access to a community of expert practitioners that are there to help consumers navigate wellness options that are right for them — and make diagnoses. That expert advice can then be augmented by online consultations that let users talk to and email practitioners from home and set up appointments at convenient times (both in the evening and on weekends).  WellnessFX also aims to give its users access to current diagnostics, nutritional research, genetic data, and integrated therapies, as well as charts and graphs that make it easy to track complex lab results, genetic info, and your own health status.  Obviously, the goal here is to become an integrated web solution that gives consumers an easy way to manage the wealth of health information available online, as well as an easy way to track and measure their own personal health data. By aggregating the “biomarkers of the primary detractors of wellness”, like cardiovascular disease, diabetes, etc., and combining those with feeds from self-tracking health and fitness devices, the team said, WellnessFX seems to be playing with the idea of becoming generation WebMD. And speaking of WebMD, the startup also happens to be founded by Jim Kean, who founded Sapient Health back in 1995, which would later become the foundation of WebMD’s consumer facing business. The team has plenty of experience in the healthcare industry, and as the prediction that nearly all of us will be managing our health online in the next few years only becomes more true by the day — WellnessFX is certainly onto an important trend. But with some other nifty, lean startups navigating the same space, they certainly have their work cut out for them. For more on WellnessFX, visit them at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At Disrupt NYC in May, a startup called Meporter launched its location-based news app that enables every man, woman, and child to write, photograph, and record their own video of local news — as it breaks. Of course, recording will only take you so far. Meporter also allows users to share those very stories they cover with any Internet-connected and mobile-device-carrying person on the planet. Using Meporter, all those with iOS devices could easily use them to take a picture, make a video, and write their own story — becoming their own one-man or one-woman New York Times or TechCrunch — in a matter of minutes. Of course, we can’t recommend trying to become your own TechCrunch, but it’s theoretically possible. Originally only available for iOS, the Disrupt alumni is now officially announcing the release of their Android app in public beta. Just like the iOS version, Meporter’s Android app will allow eyewitnesses and fledgling reporters to read and report the news as it happens, in realtime, on anything from weather and traffic to politics and sports. Meporter stories can then be shared with friends via Facebook and Twitter.  Since launching, Meporter Founder and CEO Andy Leff said that app has seen international adoption, with users posting stories on everything from local weather reports during Hurricane Irene to hotel fires in the U.K., capitalizing on its realtime sharing features in much the same way that has made Twitter a go-to resource during newsworthy events.  Just like your local newspaper, Meporter offers all the standard news categories, like announcements, classifieds, crime, entertainment, health, etc. to offer a robust news experience that lets users report on anything they choose. Yet with Meporter readers can see other users’ locations, comment on stories, check in as eyewitnesses, and it only works if reporters (and commenters) post on or near the location where the news is happening. Meporter wants to guarantee that the coverage is hyperlocal, as is the ensuing commentary.  With the launch of Meporter’s Android beta, the startup is extending its “Million Man Launch” contest to the Android community. What does that mean? Meporter is giving away over $28,000 in cash prizes to the first 1 million users who sign up and share the app with their friends.  This is a great addition to the game-ified layer of Meporter, which lets users earn “press passes” (i.e. badges) for posting stories, posting to specific categories, etc., which can be redeemed for actual prizes in the Meporter store. Granted, this “Million Man Launch” may sound a desperate ploy to get people downloading, but media organizations are willing to stop at nothing these days to get you on board. And real cash and prizes aren’t such an awful deterrent. For more, check out Meporter at home here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Six days ago, Instagram pushed version 2.0 live in the App Store. A big time upgrade with a focus on the camera, co-founder and CEO Kevin Systrom expected signups to pick up some significant steam. But it was more like they caught fire. Over the weekend, Instagram was seeing a signup rate of over one new user a second — roughly 75 per minute, Systrom says. This pushed them past the 10 million user milestone. Remarkably, it took the hot startup Foursquare just over two years to get to 10 million users — Instagram did it in just under a year. It took Twitter and Facebook well over two years to hit the milestone as well. Even more remarkably, Instagram has done it while being available only on one platform: iOS. Remember too: this is a company with just six employees still. With the new surge, Instagram has cracked the top 10 free apps in the App Store once again. They’re just ahead of Google+ and the only apps in front of them are games. You can find Instagram in the App Store here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Realtime semantic startup Evri is debuting its brand-new iPad application today, where it joins the crowded “iPad news magazine” space filled with the likes of Flipboard, The Daily, Zite, Pulse, NewsMix, AOL Editions, News360 and others. To differentiate itself from the pack, Evri’s app employs a combination of social news and topical streams, allowing readers to follow their interests as opposed to just following sources. The new app relies heavily on Evri’s semantic underpinnings to turn unstructured data into topic-based channels. The company’s content discovery engine analyzes feeds from 15,000 news sources, runs the data through its natural language processing (NLP) parser and extracts entities which are put into Evri’s semantic index. In addition, the engine also determines what news is trending based on things like how many times a topic was covered, the velocity of coverage, how often its being shared on Twitter or Facebook and more. And unlike apps like News Corp.’s The Daily, Evri’s index is updated every 15 minutes, not…well, you know, daily. In other words, it’s a fairly robust backend technology that Evri has in place, no doubut helped in part by last year’s acquisition of another semantic search startup, Radar Networks. But more importantly, at least to consumers, is the new app’s interface. Given that Evri hasn’t always been a leader in terms of design, it was a concern. (Does anyone remember Evri’s bright pink “Top Gossip” mobile app? I do. Shudder.) As it turns out, the Evri iPad app is a big improvement in the looks department. The user interface takes a little inspiration from Pulse, as it also features image thumbnails overlaid by white-on-black text. However, Evri offers its own unique take on topic navigation. At the top of the screen are brightly colored squares for the major categories, including Top News, U.S. & World, Entertainment, Sports, Business and Technology. These are preceded by three grey buttons for social news (Twitter and Facebook) and “Now Following,” the section dedicated your personalized list of favorite topics. Tap on any of these major categories to see the trending news within those areas or delve into subcategories using the navigation on the side (also image thumbnails, but smaller.) That may sound like a lot of navigational options, but it’s well done, not overpowering and it disappears when you need it to. As you dig into the various sections, however, you’ll find only articles snippets, not the stripped down, clean text that apps like Flipboard provide. Evri is determined to be more “publisher friendly,” sending its users over to the actual website using an in-app browser, complete with sharing buttons and a “read later” option that supports both Instapaper and Read It Later. For readers, unfortunately, that’s not as pleasant an experience as the iPad-optimized Flipboard, which is, frankly, still the app to beat in this space. In testing, Evri’s app had the occasional slowdown and crashed a couple of times, but the version I used was still in development. Hopefully by today’s launch, those bugs have been squashed. When the app was functioning, it was easy to swipe through pages, star favorite topics, share, save and read articles. Evri for iPad is a free download via iTunes. In the future, it may include in-app advertising for monetization purposes, but the company doesn’t have those details sorted yet. Says CEO Will Hunsinger, Evri first just needed to get in the game. And as they say, joked Hunsinger, “you can’t get in the game if you’re not on the field.”   Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInRies on Efficient WorkflowIn part III of Chris Dixon’s Founder Stories interview with Eric Ries, the Lean Startup author explains how Toyota’s “lean manufacturing” production model can be applied to startups.   Ries tells Dixon one of the phrases Toyota uses on the production line is “stop the line so that the line never stops.” It means “if you want to be able to sustainably have high productivity you have to stop as soon as you have a quality problem and remove it because quality problems pile up and compound… eventually you can grind your whole development organization to a halt.” He thinks Toyota’s workflow can be applied to product development in what he calls “continuous deployment.”  Relating the concept to software development Ries says teams who think they are saving time by releasing on a monthly schedule, for instance, are actually not doing so. After each rollout an inordinate amount of time is wasted fighting fires and this “takes away from your ability to do a good job on the next release.” Ries advocates for a fix it when its broke approach. Below, Dixon asks Ries if Lean Startup principals can apply to venture capital? Ries offers that it could be advantageous for investors to make smaller, more consistent investments versus offering fewer, larger rounds—but notes the problem to this approach is “we don’t currently have any objective data about who is making progress and who is not.” Dixon points out that large upfront rounds offer value in the sense that they provide a mental security blanket so founders can focus on building instead of continuously worrying about fundraising. Splitting the difference, Ries thinks, “we have to figure out a way to give people that same psychological sense of comfort but still have the investors and entrepreneurs together be able to work together on creating some incentive to be able to pivot sooner.” All too often Ries say, founders build for months only to realize its too late to switch gears. Watch the entire episode to hear to find out why Ries thinks Mark Zuckerberg defines vision. Also be sure to watch episodes I and II of this interview. Past Founder Stories episodes are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: This is a guest post by Brenden Mulligan, entrepreneur and creator of Onesheet, who is currently traveling around the world meeting startups with his wife and IDEO designer Elle Luna. You can follow him on Twitter here: @bmull. Before coming to Japan, we asked everyone we knew for advice on how to connect with the startup community in Tokyo. Every recommendation pointed at the exact same place: Open Network Lab. Open Network Lab (“Onlab”) is a Japanese startup incubator in the same vein as Y Combinator or TechStars. The incubator provides startups with mentorship, office space, and a small amount of cash in exchange for a piece of equity. This model is popular in the United States, and leading Japanese internet company Digital Garage (investors in Twitter, Path, and more) wanted to try it in Japan. Onlab is currently in its second year of operation has incubated three batches of startups. Even though it’s a young program, they are already making an noticeable impact on the Japanese startup community. We spent our first hour talking with Hironori (Hiro) Maeda, the guy in charge of overseeing the incubator’s operations. Hiro grew up in Japan and attended an international school before going on to study computer science at Bucknell University. After college, he launched a startup of his own, and several years later was asked to return to Japan to help build and run Onlab as a way to move the Japanese entrepreneurial community forward. But developing that community has its cultural challenges. “Launching a startup, where there is a lot of uncertainty and unsuitability, does not fit a culture where harmony and stability are strongly emphasized,” Hiro told us. “However, a lot of younger Japanese are realizing that the nation itself is at uncertainty. The employment rate of college graduates have reached the lowest point in the past decade and the Japanese earthquake has made the people in entire nation uncertain about their future. The uncertainty and the increasing interest of the success that Silicon Valley is experiencing has made more younger Japanese take bigger risks.” This has led to a ton of interest in Onlab from both entrepreneurs and the general public. This interest doesn’t come without its hurdles, however. Even though the community is willing to take risks, Hiro says it’s just not quite ready to be as transparent as entrepreneurs in other parts of the world. “Entrepreneurs in Japan haven’t realized the benefits of transparency and sharing information. People are afraid of sharing ideas and experiences — thinking that it is their only competitive advantage”, he said. In more mature startup communities like Silicon Valley, entrepreneurs share their war stories on a regular basis. And they don’t hide their failures, but instead embrace them and try to help others avoid it. Hiro knows this, and is fostering the same type of communication with his startups: “We encourage failed entrepreneurs to move on to their next idea and hope that they will see their failure as an experience they can take advantage of for their next venture.” Hiro also requires his startups to get together at least once a week to discuss ideas that have worked, tasks that they found challenging, and points in they’re development where they’re getting stuck. Although it doesn’t necessarily come naturally, it’s working. Hiro says these sessions are getting better and better and the entrepreneurs are seeing the value in openness and transparency. And Japan is taking notice.  When we were there, national network Tokyo TV was spending the day filming the lab and talking to the startups. When they found out some people from Silicon Valley were visiting too, they asked us to sit down for an interview. Most of the questions were around whether or not Japan had the ability to compete with Silicon Valley and whether Onlab could work. Overall, my responses were that it was already working. People are learning about this community all over the world and Onlab has started to put the Japanese entrepreneurial community on the map.  We also spent a few hours talking to and mentoring the startups (listed below). Overall, the companies were on par with the types of startups you see in the Bay Area’s incubators. There was an impressive focus on design and user experience and most had well-fleshed out business models and quality prototypes. As a taste of what Onlab has been producing, here is a quick look at a few of the incubator’s current startups: GifteeGiftee has built a platform that allows people to send each other gift certificates for physical goods. They’re responding to the gifting trend, and already have deals in place with some major brands in Japan, including Muji. FindJPNFindJPN is the AirBnB for Japanese experiences. They focus on providing a marketplace for some of the best excisions, experiences, and events that tourists to Japan can easily purchase via their website. ABCLoopABCLoop is building a language learning community that enables people help each other learn a foreign language in very short, direct interactions. The site gathers the lessons in Loops, which are conversations around a particular topic. PirkaPirka has built a mobile app that inspires people to help pick up litter around them, by giving users a social network to post photos of what they’ve picked up. They’ve already recorded over 20,000 pieces of trash picked up in 20 countries. DressfulDressful is building a social shopping network for working woman, where they are recommended new items by Dressful according to their taste profile and also by their friends through a mobile app. MiepleMieple is building a new way to meet people through your social connections. Think about it as LinkedIn Introductions for the entire web. Our advice: Pay attention to what Onlab is doing and expect to see it develop and inspire a new generation of Japanese entrepreneurs. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInRies Discusses Testing the Lean StartupResuming their conversation from episode I, Chris Dixon asks Lean Startup author Eric Ries to offer evidence of uber successful “internet/software companies that have adopted or used the lean startup movement.” Ries has worked with companies such as Dropbox, Groupon, and Intuit, but he doesn’t claim any credit for their success.  He notes though that the larger point is this: “How do you know just because someone claims to have followed this model and that it made them rich and successful how do you know that is actually true? How do you know there is any causal link between the two?” He tells Dixon, “I want The Lean Startup to be a scientific theory that is itself falsifiable.” Ries encourages leaders to test The Lean Startup’s concepts, at least on a small scale, and decide for themselves if it improves performance. Below, the topic turns to “vanity metrics,” which Ries thinks are bogus. He says when companies roll out stats like number of users or hits they offer a “good strategic weapon” but really represent a whole lot of nothing. “The reason companies like to talk about vanity metrics is they both make your competitors feel bad about themselves and also reveal nothing about your business.” Vanity metrics devolve into what Ries calls “success theater” which is the action of “making people think that you are being successful rather than energy you could put into serving customers.” Reis says “if you look at the accounting metrics, ROI, profitability, everything we get trained to do as a corporate CFO or VC, those metrics cannot tell the difference between the team that is on the brink of success or a team that spent that year goofing off.” Hammering home the point he says “the current metrics paradigm literally can’t tell the difference between absolute success and total disaster.” Prime example?  Twitter. Watch the video to find out why—and to find out what data Ries claims companies should focus on. Past episodes of Founder Stories are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This post is authored by guest contributor Jon Bischke. Jon is a founder of RG Labs and is an advisor to several startups. You can follow Jon on Twitter here. I heard them say they’re shutting Detroit down.But I won’t leave ‘cause this is my hometown. — Kid Rock, “Times Like These” San Francisco. Palo Alto. New York. Cambridge. Austin. Boulder. Detroit. One of those doesn’t seem to fit in there right? After all, Detroit’s a mess isn’t it? The median house price in Detroit is $6,000. Half of the adults in the city are functionally illiterate. 48% of children live below the poverty line. Some people would say that Detroit epitomizes what is wrong with America. But for a group of talented and motivated entrepreneurs in Detroit it’s something else. It’s a chance to show what’s right about America. Last week I had the pleasure of meeting with a dozen of Detroit’s top founders to discuss what it’s like to start a company in what’s probably the most economically depressed city in the country. While their businesses were different and they didn’t agree on everything, they all shared one thing: a strong feeling that the Detroit of the future will be better than the Detroit of the present. The meetup came together in large part due to the efforts of Ben Bator, the founder of Texts from Last Night, a somewhat random idea that spawned a website with four million monthly unique visitors, a book and a development deal with Sony Television. Ben is the kind of the guy who could start a company anywhere but instead has chosen to grow his company in Detroit and help to provide jobs in the community that he grew up in. If that attitude sounds familiar it might be because of a guy named Dan Gilbert. Gilbert, a Detroit native, founded Rock Financial back in the 80s and the company was acquired in 2000 by Intuit and rebranded as Quicken Loans. In 2010, Quicken Loans moved its headquarters and 1,700 employees to downtown Detroit and plans to move an additional 2,000 people downtown by the end of this year. Estimates of Gilbert’s wealth have exceeded a billion dollars, plenty of money for him to buy the Cleveland Cavaliers and perhaps more importantly plow some of his cash back into the Detroit startup scene through Detroit Venture Partners (DVP). Jake Cohen, who joined DVP in November, feels that Detroit is on the verge of a startup renaissance. “There are a number of advantages to starting a company in Detroit including lower costs, strong talent at the local schools like the University of Michigan, Michigan State and the College for Creative Studies at Wayne State and an an opportunity to fill a local hiring void left by the downsizing of the auto industry.” DVP has written checks for 10 companies in the last year alone and the company’s roster of investors includes impressive guys including Josh Linkner, DVP’s CEO and founder of the ePrize and, most recently, Michigan’s favorite son, Magic Johnson, who joined as a General Partner in July. The renaissance in Detroit is one that spans generations. It includes guys like Andrew Rauh, a guy who Peter Thiel should be actively recruiting for his 20 Under 20 program. Andrew, a freshman at the University of Michigan, has already started one company and been featured by Fast Company. Andrew’s resume is one of the most impressive of any teenager I’ve encountered and includes being published by Johns Hopkins University, finishing 3rd in an International Science Fair and raising money for Haiti after the earthquake. But it’s not just young guys starting companies in Detroit. Hossein Nivi might be a bit older than your average tech entrepreneur but he’s no less visionary. Hossein is attempting to disrupt education and training through Pendaran. Imagine a cross between a flight simulator, a boot camp and a business school and you have a highly effective training model that’s been used within a number of corporations. And if Hossein’s surname is recognizable, it’s likely because you’ve seen the work of his sons out in San Francisco, Babak (“Nivi”), the founder of AngelList, and Farbood, the founder of Grockit. So while it’s easy to look at Detroit and feel discouraged by what’s going on, spend an hour with one of Detroit’s entrepreneurs and your mindset will change. Raji Bedi, the founder of doingtonight (think Plancast for where you’re going out tonight), put it well with an emphatic statement. “We don’t want your pity or to be someone’s charity project. We want Detroit’s startup companies to stand on their own.” After spending time with the founders of other innovative companies like Are You a Human (game-based CAPTCHA), Gumshoe (a social game best described as “Clue meets The Amazing Race”), HealPay (disruptive play in the collections space) and Own Point of Sale (social point of sale) and with the people behind incubators like Detroit Labs and Tech Town I was left with a strong sense of hope for Detroit. The numbers are pretty clear. Job growth comes from startups. So if Detroit is to come back it’ll be the founders that assembled last week (and hopefully many more who will follow in their footsteps) who will be part of driving that job growth. No pity here. The kids in Detroit are definitely alright.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily September 12 - 14, 2011						 |The Concourse at San Francisco Design Center, San Francisco, CA			  [tc_speakertext_off]One of my favorite bits from Disrupt SF was the set of rapid-fire presentations from Imagine K12, an incubator for education-related startups. We heard in June that some 200 applicants had been narrowed down to 10 companies, and those 10 made brief presentations in front of the audience at Disrupt. We couldn’t write them up at the time, so here is a belated rundown of these interesting new companies and services. I urge our readers to watch the video or at least skim our summaries and evaluations. Startups too seldom directly address social issues like this, and one of these services might be something that can really benefit you or your kids. I’ll go through these in the order they gave presentations, and I’ll give timecodes for each so you can skip directly to them if you like.  (4:33) The disconnect between group-based teaching and individual learning is addressed by Goalbook, which hopes to produce for every student a single, shared learning plan. The alternative, parent-teacher conferences and counselor meetings, is totally out of date, and simple social networking tools can improve the situation significantly, in their opinion. Instead of a file in a cabinet somewhere and a few notes jotted on attendance sheets or classwork, every student is a node in a network of educators, administrators, and parents. A database of goals, strategies, and so on will be used to create a recommendation engine for helping students. They’re launching in a number of Bay Area districts and private schools. The question for me is whether teachers will in fact have the time or inclination to do much more than rubber stamp this profile when homework is or isn’t put in, when they do or don’t attend, and so on. Rich data is a good thing, but someone has to create it, and teachers are already hard up for time.  (7:45) Training of teachers, while an expensive and highly necessary process, is stuck in the past, with paper-based tracking and feedback, and irregular goals and recommendations. Formative learning hopes to put all this teacher training in a single location, where everything is done in a universally-understood way and that data is used to recommend courses, videos, and so on to improve teaching. Naturally this is only one part of the training process, and the most important bit is still attracting and retaining motivated teachers. And no matter how right-on your recommendations are for this or that skill, hands-on learning and a supportive, happy staff is going to be more key. Of course, that’s a whole other problem.   (11:03) There are a number of reasons why the means of communication between teacher, student, and parent are limited. There are questions of authority, privilege, and so on. Yet effective and timely communication is an important part of education, and something that’s far more likely to be found in small class sizes and private schools. Remind101 wants to provide a safe and effective tool for this using a form of communication kids seem to prefer over face-to-face interaction anyway: text messages. The founder describes it as “Twitter for teachers,” but with careful controls to make it secure and private. Instead of having teachers use personal cell phone numbers and so on, Remind101 acts as an middle man between teachers, their students, and the parents of those students. I honestly can’t think of any drawbacks to this. It’s safe, it’s simple, and it uses existing infrastructure. It can be integrated with school databases in a day and engagement level is up to the participants. We did a follow-up interview with Remind101’s founder here.  (13:30) Crowdsourcing tutoring, who’d have thunk? TutorCloud thinks that they’re going to be the ones who make the $8 billion tutoring market a little more modern and accessible. Their service works as a marketplace for college students hoping to shop themselves out as tutors to younger kids or peers who can’t quite get the hang of organic chemistry. They use the Facebook Connect API to make personality matches as well as subject and pricing. All the communication happens within the system so personal information remains secure, and more responsive tutors get higher rankings. The actual tutoring occurs via video chat with a shared whiteboard space. The marketplace for tutors sounds fine, but to be honest, I don’t think video-based tutoring is going to engage enough to make people want it over a real-life person, the advantages of which are many. I’m afraid parents would rather pay for a tutor’s gas or drive their kid to the library for a meetup. Perhaps as online collaboration tools become richer and more accepted this will seem more of a viable option.  (17:05) Kids these days don’t play Carmen Sandiego or Mavis Beacon, and that’s a tragedy, but they do like to play games online. Why shouldn’t these games be interesting, social, competitive, and educational? BrainNook is putting together a lot of new games and experiences aimed at elementary-level kids that hopes to be engaging while providing some standard lessons in arithmetic, spelling, and so on. The information from these games would be available to kids’ parents and teachers. I have to admit here that I’m a bit disconnected from the world of online kids’ games. But BrainNook sounds like a great thing to have available to teachers for extra credit. Miss a homework assignment? Get to level 3 in the math game. Home sick? Sign in and talk to your friends in the virtual classroom. Whether they can actually make the games fun is a question yet to be answered, however. Kids are fickle creatures. What BrainNook needs is personality.  (20:09) Schools collect a ton of data just in order to be compliant with various laws and regulations: keep this many years of counselor records, teacher evaluations, etc. on file in case they need to be checked. But all these years of data, from which something meaningful might be gleaned or trends detected, are sitting in drawers or stuck in separate databases. Few schools really organize this information well or provide access to people like teachers and administrators. Eduvant integrates all this data into a single platform. You can put all kinds of data and analytics in one place with quick, browser-based access. There are tools for creating new data as well — referrals for counseling and such. Again, my issue is that producing this data may be more work that teachers and others in the system can’t handle. The principal dashboard they showed would be handy, but how live is it? Who is generating that data? Who’s scanning in paper reports? Expecting a quick changeover to this online system is optimistic in my opinion, as useful as it could be. But whether it’s Eduvant or one of its descendants, I definitely see systems like this in place a few years from now when these hurdles have been cleared.  (24:20) There are a number of services available to teachers for various in-class tasks like putting together quizzes, distributing work and resources, and receiving homework online. Unfortunately, they lack connectivity, and one useful tool may not communicate to another, or it may require extra work on the part of the teacher. ClassConnect wants to offer a one-size-fits-all package that lets teachers create lectures, test and assess students, and manage class content. They also made a rich lecture presentation tool that lets students interact with the content. The trouble here is that it requires a certain level of savvy on the part of students as well as teachers. Students who aren’t motivated will take the path of least resistance, and that will likely be the old tools: paper, pencil, and excuses. And underprivileged kids and districts are going to be left out of this, so it’s going to be hard to make it a standard tool. That said, the easy creation and sharing of class data could shave precious minutes off teachers’ schedules and leave more time for the all-important in-person interactions.  (27:47) The creation and distribution of rich educational media is a space Educreations feels is going to blow up, but the tools required to effectively make content are disconnected and not aimed at beginners. They’ve created a simple online service where you can draw, type, and bring in external content that gets automatically encoded and shared in a single place. It’s like an Open Khan Academy. I have no doubt of the company’s ability to deliver what they’re describing, but is it really that valuable? This form of visual aid (essentially a whiteboard recording) may or may not be a good match for the content teachers are presenting. I feel like they’re hitching their wagon to the nearest star, and not looking forward far enough. Also, writing with a mouse sucks.  (30:55) The $13 billion textbook industry is ripe for disruption, says 11 Learning’s founder. The existing system of working for perhaps years on a single large volume is inefficient and expensive. They’ve put together a platform on which authors can create and edit textbooks and publish them for minimal cost. If I’m not mistaken, this whole startup is essentially valuing the contributions of authors and professors at zero. A few professors may be okay with donating some of their time to editing a textbook, but are the 40 or 50 overworked profs, copy editors, and artists really going to continue giving away their work with the promise of some rev share later on? 11 Learning’s $5000 “fixed cost” figure is meaningless. Producing high-quality content is time-consuming and expensive because the people who create that content value their time. Furthermore, many subjects simply do not lend themselves to “crowdsourced” editing and content creation. And the way teaching is moving, centralizing content is on its way out anyway. This is like making improvements to steam engine production lines when the automobile is about to make its debut.  (33:55) Managing student behavior is a major problem in our school systems, wasting tons of class time and monopolizing the attention of new teachers in particular. In ClassDojo, students in classes are publicly awarded points and badges via a web or smartphone app, and that data (+1 for answering, -1 for passing notes) is automatically tracked and shared with parents. From the moment this guy said “we’re making software that fixes bad behavior in class,” I was skeptical. And when he said it “improves behavior in real time,” my alarms went off. This is just gold star stickers in a web app. It’s a huge overpromise that relies on way too many assumptions and ignores the realities of bad behavior. If students behave poorly because they don’t respect the teacher or value their time in school, that’s not something that will be fixed by a simplistic virtual point system — it will be either ignored or resented by the majority of students. Real behavior problems and real behavior management require time and work. There’s no way around that, especially not with something as flimsy as this. The test for many of these startups is whether they last beyond the trial phase, which all of them are clearly in. The big numbers they’re seeing are like the initial bump in any new service. You hear about it (in this case Imagine K12 certainly pitched the local districts), you give it a try, and then, organically, you either continue or stop using it. Some I can see truly picking up. Remind101, Eduvant, and ClassConnect I give a good chance of being picked up, if at first only for a fraction of what they do. I think some of these may be forced to fold or pivot when confronted with non-theoretical use scenarios. And of course every teacher and school is different, and has different requirements, so support is going to be a full-time job. Also, and I recognize this is an industry-wide problem with young startups, but it would help to have a little more proving time under their belts. Sure, a few weeks or months in however many districts is good, but what these guys really need is to pick two or three very different classrooms and work very closely with them for an entire school year, or failing that, at least half of one. What they need isn’t skyrocketing user counts, which often fall under the cooked numbers category, but real-life case studies. No principal is going to care that you have 10,000 classrooms being tracked by your tools. They will, however, care when you tell them about one classroom that dramatically improved engagement, or showed a 50% increase in parent involvement, or what have you. Too many of these startups are under the impression that a burst of momentum in the beginning means their service is effective. Not true. The service is effective if it is effective, and education isn’t a sprint, it’s a long haul. Even though I don’t agree with the ideas or execution of all the companies in this first “class” of Imagine K12 companies, I’m all admiration at the fact that they are being attempted at all. Too much of startup culture is focused on bleeding-edge consumption, totally ignoring areas where even minimal applications of the tech we take for granted could improve conditions significantly in education, social services, and so on. I look forward to the next generation of Imagine K12 startups. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’m not often the fan of startups that are “the this, for that,” but I think I could get into something like Deal Décor: it’s the Groupon for furniture. This San Francisco-based startup is using the group-buying model made popular by Groupon to connect customers with factory-direct deals from overseas furniture manufacturers. The company is launching on Monday in San Francisco, which will serve as the pilot program for the service for 6 months. Afterwards, the plan is to launch in one new city every month, scaling up to reach the 20 largest metro areas in the U.S. Although consumers might not realize it, Deal Décor isn’t exactly a direct rip of the Groupon model. Where Groupon uses group-buying to promote coupons, Deal Décor uses group-buying to get better prices on furniture orders from manufacturers. Savings range anywhere from 30% to 70%, the company says. A closer competitor would be something like home goods-focused flash sales site One Kings Lane, or others in the space like Gilt Groupe or Ideeli. But those sites are offering steep discounts on high margin retail items, they’re not getting factory-direct deals. The first deal being offered to San Francisco shoppers is a 3-piece sectional sofa that comes from Vietnam. Here it is on EverythingFurniture.com for $949. Amazon has it here for $706. Walmart lists it at $829. Deal Décor’s price? $399. Items are selected through the founders’ relationships with factories – they find out the top-selling items, and tack on their extra volume to the end of the production run, which keeps costs down.  Further discounts are possible, too, because typical gross margins for furniture retailers tend to run 50% (sometimes even 100%) over wholesale pricing. But because Deal Décor is purchasing directly from the manufacturers, not the importer or wholesaler, its gross margins can be lower. As is its overhead. However, its net margins are closer to what furniture retailers make. In addition to Vietnam, the company’s founders, Craig Sakuma and Gregory Lok, have built up a network of over 100 factories in Asia, including China, Malaysia and Indonesia.  The network was developed over the past decade or so through their experience at furniture retailers and companies like Home Depot, Target, Home Decorators Collection, William Sonoma and Hamilton Spill Furniture Group, where they worked in management, consulting and hands-on roles throughout the supply chain. Of course, with Deal Décor, you might not have the plethora of options that a furniture retail store would offer in terms of customizations to the furniture itself, value-added services like leather or fabrication protection, in-store warranties, financing options and more. But like some brick-and-mortars, Deal Décor operates locally, allowing the company to able to handle customer deliveries and returns locally, too. In San Francisco, the company partnered with a third-party logistics firm (also a FedEx partner), to handle warehousing, delivery and customer notifications. On top of the sofa’s purchase price, customers pay $6 to pick it up at the warehouse or $33 for home delivery. Deal Décor says it’s not making delivery a profit center for the business, though. For those wanting to see the sofa in real life first, it will be on display in local venues like the Treasure Island Flea Market, for example. The same model involving third-party logistics and local venues for showcasing the items will be used as Deal Décor moves into other regions. (To see if Deal Décor is coming to your area in the future, check out the sign up form at the bottom of the company homepage.) Eventually, the company hopes to offer more than one item at a time on its website per region, so there’s always a bedroom, dining and living room item available at all times. Deal Décor is funded by Sakuma and Lok at present, but is in talks with several Bay area VCs and angels. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInEric Ries on the Lean Startup’s Back-StoryIn this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Dixon sits down with The Lean Startup author, Eric Ries. Ries tells Dixon he jumped into the startup game in the late 90′s and like almost everybody else at the time, “when the bubble crashed we were completely toast.” Leaving the carnage behind Ries headed to Silicon Valley with the mission of learning “professional entrepreneurship.” In the Valley Ries joined There, which he describes as a “Second Life competitor.” There had tens of millions of dollars in funding and top-tier talent. After five years in stealth development, it also had a high profile, unspectacular rollout which Ries remembers as “embarrassing and humiliating.” Lesson learned, or so he thought. Ries launched IMVU, where “instead of spending years and millions of dollars in stealth mode we put a product in customers hands in full open public beta in six months.” Unfortunately IMVU also had a less than stellar initial release, but Ries tells Dixon the experience ultimately helped IMVU get the model right and led to him forming what would become the Lean Startup methodology. In the video below, Ries and Dixon discuss what being lean means. Key concepts include iterating quickly, rapidly putting product in customers hands and getting feedback from customers. Ries agrees that lean “has nothing to do with the amount of money you raise.” Watch the full episode for additional insights and be sure to catch past episodes of Founder Stories, which feature leaders including Dustin Moskovitz and Kevin Ryan. Part II of Dixon’s conversation with Ries is coming up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve been using a pretty cool app of late called Fantastical. It’s OS X-only but I suspect the Windows crowd would get a kick out of it as well.  Basically it’s a natural language calendar app. You can paste (nearly) anything into its little window and it will automagically create an event. “Dinner with Joe at 5pm on Thursday” works just as you would imagine it would and unless today is Thursday, Fantastical will figure things out. It fumbles sometimes with word order and ends up setting all day lunches with “Tuesday” but most of the time that’s reparable with a few keystrokes. The app does reproduce some of the features of OS X Mail, especially the automatic date entry features, but I’ve found that I use it to record flight times by copying and pasting them from the airline website and I’m able to create ad hoc events (“Drinks with T-Pain 5pm Weds”)  and even simple reminders (“call Dalai Lama tomorrow”). The company, founded by school chums Michael Simmons and Kent Sutherland the app has been around since May. There’s a new update coming shortly that will enable in-line calendar entry editing. The app costs $20 and is available for a free trial. The pair built their own CalDAV implementation so it works with almost any calendaring service. It also has a custom alarm setting as well as complete search functionality. Again, it’s stuff that has existed before, but now it’s in one place with a quick and easy interface. It, along with apps like QuicKeys, has streamlined my day-to-day PIM and writing activities considerably. We don’t review a lot of apps on TC (we’ll probably start adding app reviews over time) but this is an app that I got a big kick out of and I think it’s quite simple and quite useful. Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily After raising $9 million in venture funding from Norwest Venture Partners and Doll Capital Management earlier this year, Basis Science has been able to continue their year-long research and design development of a new affordable heart and health monitor that can be worn all the live-long day right on your wrist. In anticipation of its showcase at Health 2.0, the startup is today revealing the design and features of its so-called “B1 Basis Band” that will launch in the market later this year.  While there are a number of health-tracking devices on the market today, the Basis Band seems poised to be a disruptive product in the health space. Priced at $199, the Band is on the expensive side but not unreasonable considering the heart and health tracker boasts multiple sensors that measure heart rate continuously, along with calories burned, sleep patterns, and other physiological metrics. What’s more, the device boasts an LCD touchscreen interface that allows for easy navigation and displays the date and time — potentially making it a pretty great replacement for your measly old wrist watch.  Of course, what makes this new health product so cool is that it is connected to a (free) web-based personal dashboard that allows users to view comprehensive data pulled from the device’s monitoring of your heart rate, sleep, and more. The dashboard then helps you further keep track of your overall health and wellness by offering push notifications, suggestions, and a game-ified experience that encourages you to set goals and monitor your progress, or blast health dates to friend and family over social networks. The data that Basis aggregates is also easily exportable, so that you’ll be able to send your health information to your personal trainer or your physician. Obviously, with the state of the health as it is today, along with the rising costs of healthcare, many people are looking to maintain a more active and healthy lifestyle to avoid those high medical bills and trips to the doctor’s office.  As most health devices on the market today attempt to calculate heart rate through footsteps or by using a smartphone’s accelerometer or GPS, said Basis CEO Jef Holove, the Basis Band offers an evolved alternative, as it uses a series of monitors to decipher health data directly from your wrist and the bloodflow underneath. This optical engine tracks heart rate by directing light into the skin to “see” the user’s blood flow and is complemented by several other sensors, including a heat sensor that tracks skin and ambient temperature changes, a 3-axis accelerometer that records movement and activity, and galvanic skin response sensors. The device then uses a series of algorithms to cut through the noise and make a number of calculations that result in a precise picture of how many calories you’ve burned, the total amount of physical exertion, sleep patterns, and so on. That data is then served to Basis’ cloud infrastructure and presented to the user in that easy-to-navigate web interface. Pretty cool.  What’s more, as the Basis Band has multiple-day battery life and is composed of polycarbonate (and is water-resistant), it’s lightweight, doesn’t get in the way, and can be worn day and night without any maintenance. It’s also modular, which means that you can change straps, both in color and style, to meet your award-winning sense of fashion. All in all, this makes for a welcome change from cumbersome chest-strap EKGs, or arm-band monitors that only offer basic functionality and that you can really only wear while running.  Basis is also announcing today that it is appointing an advisory board that includes some medical, social, and gaming big whigs to help oversee the impending launch of the Basis Band. The new advisory team will boast long-time Facebook executive (and early employee) Kevin Colleran, along with Charles and Kai Huang, the co-founders of RedOctane and creators of Guitar Hero, as well as Patrick McGill, Daniel Kraft, a Stanford and Harvard trained physician, and Jeff Rosenthal, who will be bringing his co-founders of the Summit Series along for the ride.  Chris Verplaetse, who is being added as vice president of device development, was most recently at Cisco Systems, where he was a key engineer in the development of Flip Video. The addition of these experts to its advisory team is a big strategic win both for Basis and the health industry, and is a sign that these smart, integrated devices like the Basis Band are attracting attention from experts across the board. With a sizable team in place and a sharp new product ready for launch, Basis could just be at the front of a game-changing shift in consumer health products.  It’s pretty amazing stuff. Check out Basis at home for more information.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, another photo sharing app hit the scene. But before you commence with groaning, Piictu is more than just another photo sharing app, it’s “a fun and simple way to talk and play with pics”. Still groaning? Hold on just a second. In a crowded space, Piictu’s value proposition is that it is offering a new kind of visual network where interactions take place through direct “picture conversations” — not just your average, run-of-the-mill photo sharing.  Piictu Founder Jonathan Slimak says that photos are traditionally static objects of memory, so with his new photo sharing app, he wanted to transform pictures into a conversation medium, and objects of interaction. But what does this mean exactly?  In terms of the daily Piictu experience, for starters, a user uploads a picture, gives it a caption, and immediately receives picture-based responses from other Piictu users, which forms — yup — a picture stream. Where this differs from the pack is that Piictu’s streams are set up in such a ways as they can then be made in the form of a sequential game or center around a question like, “who’s your favorite Ninja Turtle?” As to the former, Slimak cited the example of a number game that focuses on picture-based replies that continue the sequence in a game. For instance, I upload a picture of a vanity license plate that reads “Number 1” and you might respond with a picture of a two dollar bill, and so on.  Slimak says that the idea came from his experience watching the World Series on TV. His friends were posting pictures of themselves in their favorite teams’ jerseys to a group MMS app. The problem is that most of these images would never be seen again, lost in the pile, but still had great future value for ongoing conversations. So, Slimak created Piictu as an optimization of MMS group chat, with an obvious nod to Instagram. “Instagram does photo sharing perfectly”, he said, but there’s still room for photos to become the source of rich conversations and game-ified interactions. If you’re one that thinks one picture is really worth a thousand words, then Piictu is the app for you. What’s more, if you were a Photovine user, look no further. The experience of Piictu is remarkably similar to Google’s app, which was retired last month when the Googles shut down Slide.  Giving the TechStars startup a further boost, we’ve learned, is a recent infusion of $750,000 in seed funding, led by SoftBank Capital, RRE Ventures, and Betaworks. The round also included angels like Jon Steinberg from Buzzfeed, Josh Guttman from Outbrain, as well as others. Picture streams have been increasing in popularity in tandem with the rise of microblogging. Just as Twitter recently added image galleries to each user’s profile, so are many platforms looking to take advantage of the rise in pictorial conversation (thanks to the ubiquity of smartphones and their cameras). Each photo sharing app has to find its niche, and Piictu has already gained some early adoption as a result of its bet that picture streams will only continue to play an increasingly important role in how we interact and converse in our daily life.  And, as is the trend today, it doesn’t hurt to open the platform up to game-ified use cases. Slimak said that, going forward the team plans to add leaderboards to each new photo stream, with the number of “likes”, shares, and views likely determining its ranking. As to how Piictu plans to monetize its free app? The founder said that he sees Piictu as a great venue by which brands can engage visually with their customers and encourage them to submit original, user-generated content — though it remains to be seen how that will manifest. But my hunch is that the team just might be onto something with their focus on conversational photo streams. Stay tuned for more. Check it out. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Good startups often emerge from situations where the founder is attempting to solve a problem they themselves have. That was certainly the case with collegiate events site Fampus, created by 22-year old Brittany Brody, now a senior at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. As a new arrival to the university in 2008, Brody wanted to get involved on campus, but was frustrated by the lack of a dedicated site that listed both on-campus and nearby community events. So she created Fampus. There are, of course, plenty of events sites already out there. Behemoths like Facebook and Meetup.com, for example, compete in this space, as do event search, listings, and ticketing focused sites like Eventbrite, Plancast, Eventful, Zvents and dozens of others. There are also local competitors, like Metromix, for example. Even Bing is in on the event-listing action. What Brody wanted, though, was site that showed her all of University of Wisconsin-Madison events right down to the Chess Club meetings and Greek mixers, alongside popular community events.  To get Fampus started, Brittany sought help from entrepreneur (and dad) Brad Brody, who now serves as President within the organization. Over the next couple of years, and with the help of a growing staff that now includes 12 full-time employees, Fampus was engineered, designed and, as of last month, quietly launched. Today, Fampus has 7 colleges on board, each aided by on-campus interns who help promote the site, find partnering opportunities and offer local feedback. Current schools include Grand View University, Drake University, Simpson College, Iowa State University, University of Iowa, University of Nebraska at Lincoln and University of Wisconsin-Madison. Fampus aims to triple that number over the course of 2012. And it has identified a total of 300 target schools it wants to reach. In order to join Fampus, students, as well as administration and faculty, need to have a .edu email address. (Yes, just like Facebook required back in the day.) Featured events appear on the Fampus homepage, and students can click if they’re attending, “keep me in the loop” to bookmark them or “thumbs up/thumbs down” to aid in Fampus’ event recommendations. Surprisingly, there’s no calendar integration yet, but this was not at the top of students’ requests, the company says. For now, users can track their planned events and history on their profile page.  Event attendees can comment and upload photos, the latter which can be optionally posted to Facebook, too. Twitter integration is also present.  Fampus supports itself through a combination of locally focused advertising (banner and sidebar ads) as well as some sponsored event listings. The site aims to keep sponsorships to a minimum, though, because event curation is its key selling point. To that end, there is no process for listing an event of your own on Fampus. Instead, it’s primarily a database-driven site where events come in through through partnerships with event promoters, venues and its own on-campus ties. Users can “suggest an event” through a new Fampus feature, however. A mobile app (available next week) for iPhone and Android offers close to 75% of the site’s main functionality. It also includes event check-in and, interestingly, an event check-out feature. (Something more location-based social networks should have).  As to whether Fampus will one day “pull a Facebook” and open up to a broader audience…well, never say never, but for now, the company’s goal is to remain a university-closed system. Funding for Fampus is from an undisclosed sole angel investor as of this moment, but the company may pursue VC dollars starting early next year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s an age-old scenario: You’re building a company, you have a product idea, and you’ve got the framework laid out in your head, but you want some expert advice and guidance on how to take the next steps. So, you go out to find a veteran entrepreneur, ask her to be an advisor in your fledgling company … and then what?  This is where a lot of founders get stuck. Entrepreneurs want to compensate their mentors and advisors for the time they dedicate to helping their businesses grow, but they have no idea how much equity to offer. Not to mention, once the founder and advisor have nominally agreed to a relationship, law firms enter the mix and seed the new advisor with a mountain of paperwork — legal agreements, options agreements — documents stuffed with legalese and binding statements. Just this hassle alone is sometimes enough to scare an advisor away from the relationship, at which point both sides lose. So, the Founder Institute has developed a solution to this long-standing pain in the ass that all startups experience. After speaking with dozens of founders, mentors, advisors, and startup teams, the startup accelerator and network is publicly releasing what it calls the “Founder Advisor Standard Template” (FAST), a free document designed to provide founders and advisors with a simple legal framework to formalize their relationship without all the legal chaos. “We’ve been seeing at least one post per week on TheFunded concerning mentor compensation”, said Adeo Ressi, the founder of both Founder Institute and TheFunded.com (a site focused on revealing the inside truths of the Venture Capital world). Having to invent ad hoc terms to work together, negotiating terms, and throwing money into hiring lawyers can really hamstring the formation of productive founder-advisor relationships — something that can really make or break a startup in its early stages. This is where FAST enters the picture, which Founder Institute has developed in conjunction with the Orrick Law Firm and Silicon Valley entrepreneurs, to standardize the process and remove the hassle, cost, and delay to the formation of these relationships. Now, with a few signatures and a couple of checkmarks, founders and advisors can decide (in minutes) how they want to work together, what to accomplish, and how much equity will be in play.  In an effort to standardize the process with FAST (and let everyone just get back to building great companies), Founder Institute and Orrick have denoted three “levels of company maturity” that have different implications for how to define the advisor-founder agreement: idea, startup, and growth. In addition, they qualify the terms with three “levels of engagement” that define how advisors will work with founders and have varying influence on how they are compensated: standard, strategic, or expert.    For example: If an advisor meets with the founding team monthly, is involved in recruiting talent for the business, and takes a few customer calls, then that advisor would be entitled to 1 percent of the company in the form of restricted stock or options, vesting over a two-year time frame. For a growth stage company, in comparison, this level of engagement would earn an advisor 0.6 percent. What’s more, the idea here is that the agreement is codified by the two parties in such a way that it meets the minimum legal requirements but is flexible enough to allow advisors to end the relationship in as little as five days, for example. Traditionally, both beginning and terminating these contracts can take weeks — even months. But what’s so cool about this is that, in the spirit of this flexibility, the team is architecting the document by way of crowdsourcing. This means that, until they finalize the agreement (Ressi tells me that the target date is September 30th), they will be taking the input of readers, founders, startups, and beyond, incorporating the best feedback into its development. In particular, Ressi said, the team is interested in reactions to the above equity matrix. So what do you think? Does this seem like a sound system and a fair method of compensation? Let us know in the comments section, where members of the Institute will respond.  For more, see the FAST document below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Group buying platforms aren’t hard to find on the Web, but there’s been a growing backlash against the daily deal model, with some consumers and merchants finding the process to be more akin to highway robbery than good business. From high commissions fees and little control of deal details and analytics to low margins and branding concerns, some online retailers and national brands are shying away from group buying platforms.  Launching today at the Daily Deal Summit West is a platform called Rally Commerce that hopes to address these concerns as well as a market segment that is somewhat ignored by Groupon and its claque of clones: eRetail. Online retailers represent a $200 billion market — a big business, to say the least — so Rally Commerce is looking to become a “do it yourself Groupon” for eRetailers to better create, control, and profit from their own group deals and flash campaigns.  Daily deals today are still more focused on local deals and driving traffic to brick and mortar stores, while online merchants have tended to use daily deals more infrequently as part of their marketing strategies. “Over the past few months, we’ve heard top online retailers express frustration with current group deal technologies, particularly when it comes to having control and ownership of their own promotions”, said Rally Commerce CEO Henry Wong. “Rally was conceived to specifically solve these issues and is designed from the ground up to empower merchants, instead of dictating to them”.  Thus, Rally is offering a secure SaaS commerce platform that offers eBusinesses the ability to easily create deals, take advantage of word-of-mouth social distribution, and showcase those deals on Facebook, mobile, or their own standalone site. Obviously, web merchants want to be able to track conversion rates and measure the success of their deals, so Rally enables customers to take advantage of comprehensive analytics on demographic, performance, and conversions — as well as track word-of-mouth promotions on Facebook. The fact that Rally is a SaaS platform takes a bit of the weight off launching a deal mechanism for online retailers, as the startup hosts the platform so that all eBusinesses need to do is set up their store. That means that there’s no IT integration required. Just a few hours after signing up, online merchants can begin launching deals, after which they control everything and don’t have to worry about space or any of the nuts and bolts of deal creation or publishing.  Another cool facet of Rally is its white label functionality: The startup’s API enables businesses to create customized deal stores on their site or tie them directly into the platform so that they can offer their own solution to merchants. Existing white label deal platforms are solutions for publishers, not for online retailers and merchants, so Wong said that he thinks Rally will be well-positioned here in terms of offering a unique value proposition.  Rally was co-founded by Henry Wong and Lou Kerner, and brings a veteran ad and sales team to the space. The truth is that the daily deal and group buying space is still early in its evolution; there’s a lot of room for innovation and maneuvering. With Rally offering a white label solution, social graph integration, self-service deals, analytics — all from the cloud — the value proposition here seems high. Ah, but how much will it cost? Wong said that merchants will be paying 10 percent commission fees on average. Check out Rally Commerce at home here, and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Since its launch in 2009, content discovery engine Thoora has been in private beta. But today the site, which combines aggregation, curation and search for personalized news streams, is stepping our of private beta and is now public.   There’s no doubt that there is a content overload when it comes to news sites, blogs and social networks. Thoora discovery engine that gives users a new way to discover, monitor and share news from the web on specific topics.  Thoora’s patented engine scours 28 million online sources and uses more than 100 signals to find and rank content. Thoora allows users to curate results by topic, and the engine learns from that curation, and starts delivering a more personalized feed.  You can build topics with multiple keywords, curate content by ‘favorite’-ing or removing articles, posts, and specific sources, filter by Twitter stream, and more. Users can also share their Thoora searches to their social networks, including Facebook and Twitters.  So what took Thoora so long to launch its product to the public? The startup says that there’s been an explosion of social media and content since 2009 and Thoora was working on integrating this into the application. The startup was also working on its proprietary technology that curates and aggregates news.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Finding the product that best fits your specific needs isn’t always an easy feat, not even on the Web. Get.com recently launched as a product discovery service, aiming to make life for potential buyers easier by crowd-sourcing product recommendations from members of its online community. Initially, Get.com will center around Q&A (The Next Web calls it a Quora twist).  From an earlier press release: When we shop online, we often spend hours searching and reading review after review on Amazon, trying to figure out which is the best product for our requirements. Get.com’s platform will reduce the guesswork for millions of people.  Get.com allows you to post a product question with requirements, such as “What is the best electric toothbrush for sensitive gums under $100?,” and receive a crowd-sourced answer based on the community’s product suggestions and votes. Competitors include Bestcovery, FindTheBest.com and the recently launched Top10. Get.com was created by former Stickam execs Jake Gold and Steven Fruchter. The startup, which is based in Santa Monica, CA, has raised $1 million in seed funding from unnamed angel investors. The fledgling company says it will start raising its Series A in the next few months. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Silver Tail Systems, a provider of predictive analytics for detection and prevention of online fraud, this morning announced that it has secured an additional round of funding from Citi Ventures, a unit of Citigroup.  This investment, the size of which was not disclosed, is part of a previously announced $20 million Series B funding round led by Andreessen Horowitz (closed in June). Silver Tail Systems provides on-premise and SaaS solutions to protect operators of online properties that hold critical information, such as e-commerce, financial, government and consumer-facing website publishers and owners, from online fraud and abuse. The company says it currently monitors more than 750 million users and more than 1.8 billion Web sessions per year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Since we first heard of BankSimple when Twitter’s Alex Payne left to join the venture, there has been a steady stream of funding news but not much in the way of real product. They’ve remedied that today with a walkthrough video of their web-based banking client. And I have to say, their promised of banking that “doesn’t suck” is looking intact. This is strictly a broad-strokes video, showing the look and feel of the main screens and some of the more immediately-useful features. Considering the state of most online and mobile banking solutions, I don’t think they’re in too much of a hurry, but rather are content to explain at their own rate why their service will be better. Today is just the intro. I don’t want to summarize the short and informative video, but a few points deserve commentary. The “safe to spend” balance is a great idea, but I’m afraid it might get complicated fast with linked accounts, credit lines, and the other details that tend to complicate banking. If all we ever did was deposit into and debit our accounts, banking might not even need the facelift BankSimple is aiming to provide. That said, it’s a nice at-a-glance figure that both lets you know it’s okay to take the car in today and also reminds you of the goals for which you’ve sequestered money. The searching really does look excellent. Understanding of search terms has evolved so far that it’s really inexcusable to have only simple string-matching queries for something as important as banking or medical records. It’s also helpful in the case of fraud. Having just recently had to clear up some fraudulent charges to my account, I would have loved to have quick access to my transactions with rich, plain-language search tools. Hopefully sending money is as easy as it looks. As a commenter notes, it doesn’t debit immediately, which I would really expect from it. Since BankSimple already takes the liberty of presenting a “balance” that is strictly speaking a subjective interpretation of the data, it seems like that money should have disappeared from the safe-to-spend balance right away. That could very easily be implemented, but there might also be good reason for it. (Update: on rewatching the video, I find it’s clear that the moneygram is being “scheduled.” Still, it seems it should subtract from the safe-to-spend amount) How versatile the money-sending and white cards are is also in question, though from their demos it appears they should work more or less identically to your “normal” bank card. But will we still have to deal with weirdo interstate banking laws, with international transaction fees, bank hour differences, holds on our accounts, things like that? Is this improving banking, or just the face of banking? The interface is extremely promising, but when it comes to banking we need even more promises. Improving the searching and planning of month-to-month finances is a good thing, but what about all the other things about big banks that bother us so much? I like where they’re going with this (and the investment money says others do as well), but we should all maintain a healthy but hopeful skepticism until we see the whole story. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Stealthy consumer Internet startup Dashlane is announcing today that it has closed $5 million in Series A funding led by New York City-based firms Rho Ventures and FirstMark Capital. Also participating in the round is Dashlane co-founder Bernard Liautaud. Dashlane won’t say much about its product offering just yet, only that it’s designed to eliminate the hassles involved with filling in personal information online, both on the desktop and on mobile. How exactly Dashlane is different from current solutions is still unclear. There are several companies out there that help manage form-filling and automated password creation, for example. Web browsers have their own autofill capabilities, too. But Dashlane’s promise is that it will “do more” than what’s available now, and has features designed to work specifically with e-commerce and m-commerce sites. It will not actually store your credit card information on its own servers, CEO Emmanuel Schalit tells us. We do know that it has filed four patents related to its IP, but product details, including what type of data is stores and how that’s stored, are sparse. Dashlane was founded 18 months ago by Bernard Liautaud, the co-founder and former CEO of Business Objects, which was acquired by SAP for $6.8 billion in 2007. CEO Schalit came on around 9 months ago and will help manage the company’s New York offices. Going forward, the company’s original engineering team will remain in its Paris-based offices, while its New York offices are staffed up. Over the next 12 months, Dashlane will double its roster of a dozen team members with new hires in areas that include support, community management, marketing, business development, and, as Schalit puts it, “engineers, engineers, engineers.” New York was chosen as Dashlane’s U.S. home because of the time zone differences between it and Paris as well as the commute time between the two cities. But Schalit says that the company also believes New York City is a place that’s “starting to catch up with Silicon Valley,” and is becoming an attractive place to set up an Internet business. He notes, too, that there isn’t as much competition for talent as there is out West. In addition to hiring, the new funds will be used to advance product development, and in particular, mobile development – a key piece to Dashlane’s overall solution. The desktop service will launch in a few weeks time, with the mobile component to follow. The site’s homepage is hosting a sign-up form for interested users now. As part of today’s announcement, Habib Kairouz, managing partner at Rho Ventures, and Rick Heitzmann, managing director of FirstMark Capital, will join Bernard Liautaud and Dashlane CEO Emmanuel Schalit on the board, bringing the total board to four members. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At F8 on Thursday, The Social Network will by all accounts be making its official foray into music, with scrobbling and music content galore headed straight for our news feeds. Ahead of Facebook’s new music service, Vimeo is announcing its own musical news, thank you very much, that has some interesting implications for artists and filmmakers and music technology. You may know Vimeo as the quality YouTube alternative that’s long been a place for semi-pro videographers, filmmakers, and Vloggers to host, share, and present their video content. Today, Vimeo is taking its long-awaited leap into the music world with the “Vimeo Music Store” — a custom-designed music licensing solution that will allow Vimeo’s video buffs to search for, discover, and license songs for both non-commercial and limited commercial use.   Powering the nuts, bolts, and backend of the Vimeo Music Store will be Audiosocket’s Music-as-a-Service (or MaaS) platform, a cloud solution designed to allow digital media companies to easily integrate music search, discovery, and licensing. The Vimeo Music Store, which represents the first commercial implementation of Audiosocket’s solution, will allow users to take advantage of all the benefits of a music library that contains more than 100 categories of integrated metadata, all from inside the friendly confines of Vimeo’s platform.   Vimeo users will also have the benefit of access to Audiosocket’s library of 33,000+ legit songs in the new music store, enabling the video platform’s users to select and license a wide variety of tracks that they can use as soundtracks for their video productions, with the ability to then distribute them over the Web, and film festivals, and so on, without worrying about an RIAA SWAT team descending from the roof.  On the flip side of the partnership, Audiosocket’s music artists will now have the benefit of a sizable new distribution channel (along with guaranteed royalty payments on licensed music) and exposure to Vimeo’s audience of more than 50 million monthly visitors — many of them semi-pro and professional filmmakers. On this note, obviously the real key to Vimeo’s music store is that it opens the door for musicians to monetize their work in personal video creation: An area that’s traditionally been tough for artists to make any significant profits. In this way, Audiosocket’s MaaS platform could prove to be a great way for indie musicians to receive both widespread, multimedia exposure (with attributions) and make some extra income, potentially turning Vimeo into an even more appealing musical alternative to YouTube for the world’s melody makers. (Especially as Audiosocket’s catalog specifically features content from emerging bands, composers and record labels, making it a great tool for indie music discovery.)  It’s also great to see the evolution in the relationship between music and technology — and now the cloud — as Audiosocket’s MaaS platform, which is designed for integration into video and photo sharing platforms, virtual worlds, online games and social networks, could have a disruptive effect on the way music is licensed in digital media. And we all know how much music licensing has been in the need of workable, affordable solutions (really, innovation). Just ask Napster.  After all, when you get down to it, amateur filmmakers really have no idea where to start when it comes to music licensing, and vice versa; both parties want to take advantage of the benefits without the hassle, but they’re by and large clueless on where to start.  Of course, it remains to be seen whether Vimeo users will be willing to pay to license Audiosocket’s music content, the pricing structure of which currently stands at $1.99 per track for personal, non-commercial, and web-use for casual users and $98 per track for commercial, web-use licenses for professional users. Thankfully, much of the content will be available for free thanks to Creative Commons Licensing, but professional users may be heard issuing a few groans.  Nonetheless, this could really be a real future-altering partnership for Audiosocket and is no doubt a great bonus for Vimeo users, but it also seems as if the video platform will need to go bigger with its song catalog if it’s to truly make waves.  For more, readers can check out an embeddable widget which includes sample tracks from Audiosocket’s library here and for a look at the Vimeo Music Store, check it out at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Web-based social performance platform Rypple is now available on the iPhone, the company is announcing today. Like the desktop-sized website, the new mobile application will allow managers to give real-time feedback to staff, provide coaching, track goals and publicly recognize colleagues for doing great work. The idea behind Rypple, which sees itself as a “Zynga for the enterprise,” is to use social software in the enterprise environment to build a great work culture. It does this by allowing managers to track projects, guide their team and give kudos to deserving staff for others to see within its online application. The software also employs various game mechanics, like badges, which can be custom-built to reflect a company’s own values. And, as in gaming, employees can rack up “skills earned,” in a method reminiscent of building up a character in a virtual world or MMORPG, for example. With the new iPhone application, users can track the company feed for news, update teams on the status of a project, post “thanks” and hand out badges. The app will be available as a freemium offering. There’s a limited free version, a $5 per user per month version that offers access to goals, real-time peer feedback, 0ne-on-one coaching and recognition, and a $9 per user per month version that includes Rypple’s rapid performance review application, Loops, support, rollout and integration into existing company work systems. The app is available here in iTunes now.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The San Mateo Chamber of Commerce has partnered with digital loyalty app Chatterfly to create a neighborhood rewards program for its 1,000 members. Participating local businesses will leverage the app to reward customers for visiting their business, making in-store purchases or sharing news of their visit on social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter. Along with the partnership, the company is also launching a new version of its mobile app today on both iPhone and Android, with plans for BlackBerry and Palm (Palm? What?) planned soon. Update: The company now says it mistakenly listed BlackBerry and Palm in its release, but this was an error. There are no plans for other platforms at this time.   In version 1.5, there’s now a QR code button for instant scans and “check-ins,” an instant alerts feature that tells you when rewards are nearby and “vast enhancements” to the interface. the company claims. Sadly, these enhancements seem more subtle than vast, I’d say:  Maybe I’ve just been spoiled on the Instagrams and Foursquares of the mobile app world, but I don’t enjoy this app’s design at all, despite the changes. It’s an improvement, yes, but that tiled homescreen with black & white icons needs to go. In any event, good for Chatterfly for moving forward based on its concepts surrounding digital loyalty, if not its actual implementation. The company says that more partnerships with local business networks and chambers are on their way, too. Chatterfly was founded in June 2010 by Charles Michael Yim, formerly in business development at Fortify Software. It is privately funded. Latest headlines delivered to you daily E-commerce solutions company Rearden Commerce today announced that it has raised a monster round of funding, securing a whopping $133 million in new financing from current backers American Express and JPMorgan Chase, as well as from new investor Citi. In addition, the company announced that it has acquired HomeRun.com, creator of the HomeRun social buying service and its OfferEngine platform, which powers group commerce programs for third-party consumer websites. Rearden Commerce says it will use the fresh capital to repay debt, for working capital and undefined “high-growth initiatives”, including acquisitions. Rearden offers a platform dubbed Deem, and, through a range of interoperable smart applications, seeks to leverage big data, analytics and semantics technology to optimize the exchange of goods, services, and information with personalization and repeat value to drive customer loyalty. Over the past 12 months, Rearden Commerce claims to have more than tripled its distribution channel penetration, giving it access to more than 60 million consumers, and quadrupling its merchant network to over 1.2 million.  As a result of the aforementioned acquisition, HomeRun.com services will be integrated into the Deem platform and ecosystem. Explains Patrick Grady, founder and CEO of Rearden Commerce: “Adding the expertise in social commerce and game mechanics from the HomeRun.com team, along with their pioneering work in self-service merchant tools, aims to instantly enhance the value of the Deem platform and ecosystem.  Ultimately, we are seeking to fundamentally transform commerce by perfecting the interaction between buyers and sellers by correlating an individual’s preferences, location and circumstances with all the options available from merchants – and presenting just those that are relevant to that buyer.” HomeRun will continue to offer daily deals to customers, and says it will begin to leverage the assets and personalization capabilities of Rearden’s Deem platform in the coming months. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Market Leader, a NASDAQ-listed provider of online marketing and technology solutions for real estate professionals, this morning announced the acquisition of RealEstate.com. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed, but the agreement includes the RealEstate.com domain name and website, as well as a network of more than 250 participating brokerage companies and “hundreds of other real estate domains”. Update: a Market Leader spokesperson informs us that the purchase price was $8.25 million. Market Leader earlier this year acquired kwkly, which operates a mobile software-as-a-service lead generation platform, and SharperAgent, a real estate marketing suite company. Originally founded in 1999, the company says it’s on a roll, reporting a Q2 2011 revenue increase of 43 percent over the same quarter last year. Market Leader also says it has more than tripled the number of real estate professionals using its software and services platform to more than 60,000. They use the company’s “lead-to-close” real estate marketing and technology system to grow and manage their businesses. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The developers of Wi-Fi video camera monitoring and intelligent streaming service Dropcam, has raised $5.8 million in Series A funding led by Accel Partners with participation from existing angel investors including Mitch Kapor, Aydin Senkut (Felicis Ventures), Ben Narasin Triple Point Capital), David Cowan, Salil Deshpande and Bradley Horowitz. Sameer Gandhi of Accel Partners joins the Dropcam board of directors as part of this investment round. Founded by former Xobni engineers Greg Duffy and Amir Virani, Dropcam, which we reviewed here, is a simple camera that users can set up in their home or place of business to dkeep a watchful eye on what they care about. After setting up a Dropcam camera, users can access their real-time, 24/7 video stream via a SaaS application on their computer, smartphone (via iPhone and Android apps) or tablet.  Dropcam, which costs $199, will also send you instant email and push alerts when the camera’s sensor detects motion and audio. And with Dropcam’s DVR capabilities, users can record up to 30 days of moment-by-moment video. The company says that personal video feeds can be safely and privately shared with friends and family. In fact the most common use of the technology is for home monitoring and for baby monitoring, says the startup.  The new funding will be used for product development and towards expand the software engineering team in its San Francisco offices. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Krux Digital, which helps Web publishers safeguard, manage, monetize and make responsible use of consumer data signatures across devices and formats, has secured $11 million in a Series B round of financing led by Accel Partners and IDG Ventures, with early investors participating as well, the company announced earlier this morning. Krux, founded in 2010, gives website publishers and owners a neutral platform that helps them better manage their data assets and put audience insights to work enhancing content, commerce, and advertising. The company was co-founded by Tom Chavez, previously General Manager for the Online Publisher Business Group in Microsoft’s Advertiser and Publisher Solutions (APS) group, and CEO of Rapt before that. His fellow co-founder, Vivek Vaidya, was previously the CTO of Rapt. Arthur Patterson, founding partner at Accel, and Alex Rosen, MD at IDG Ventures, are both joining the Krux Digital’s board of directors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last we heard, video had killed the radio star. But thanks to the Web, radio is finding new distribution channels and a new mobile home. When you think of Web radio, you might think of Pandora — and for good reason. Stitcher is looking to find its way into your podcast playlist by becoming the Pandora of web talk radio. So far, so good. The startup’s apps currently stream over 6,000 shows that cover everything from news and entertainment to sports and comedy. On iOS, Android, or Stitcher.com, listeners can find NPR, Fox, The Onion, the NYTimes, and even a little old blog called TechCrunch — Stitcher’s play at becoming a discovery tool for all things talk. Today marks another victory for web talk radio as Stitcher announced that it has closed a $10 million series C funding round, led by New Enterprise Associates. The round also included returning investors such as Benchmark Capital, New Atlantic Ventures, and Silicon Valley veteran investors like Ron Conway. As part of its series C raise, New Enterprise General Partner Ravi Viswanathan will be joining Stitcher’s board of directors. The new round brings Stitcher’s total funding to just under $19 million. According to the Stitcher team, the funding will be used to continue building out its content offerings and to ramp up hiring for its direct sales team. The funding follows on the heels of Stitcher’s release of a new iPhone app last week, which introduced a major redesign to its iOS mobile service. One of the most compelling changes included giving users the ability to more easily create custom stations from scratch. To go along with a more seamless and user-friendly UI, Stitcher introduced an “Add Station” button to users’ profiles to give custom station creation one-click functionality. As for many burgeoning web startups, mobile has been a growth area for Stitcher. According to Stitcher CEO Noah Shanok, the company has “added about a million new users in the last five months, with the largest increase in listening coming from mobile devices. We only expect that growth to accelerate in the coming year, especially with the explosion of smartphones hitting the market and the number of car manufacturers adopting Internet radio in their new models”, the CEO told TechCrunch. In an effort to do for talk radio what Pandora and Spotify have done for music, Stitcher is trying to take full advantage of both the mobile and automotive market. As terrestrial radio represents a $5 billion advertising market, the potential for Stitcher and others in this space is huge — and it starts with offering a personalized radio experience for both mobile and mobile automotive. As to the latter, Stitcher is currently available in vehicles through For SYNC and Buick IntelliLink’s connectivity systems. With its new funding in tow, the startup plans to continue expanding into these markets.  For more, visit Stitcher at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In November of last year, TechCrunch broke the news that Yardsellr, the eBay for Facebook (without the auctions), had raised $5 million in series A funding from Accel Partners. At the time, the investment seemed testament to the growing interest in the value of bringing eCommerce to Facebook in order to expose it to, you guessed it, your social graph.  Since then, Yardsellr has mostly remained under the radar, building out its platform and quietly growing its user base. Today, the startup is making a couple of big announcements, starting with a high-level rebrand. The motivation? Yardsellr Founder and CEO Danny Leffel tells me that his company wants to do for the eMarketplace what social gaming companies have done with studios. So, that means in practice that Leffel and company have started YellowDog Media, which will become the overarching entity, or studio, behind a diverse catalog of transaction-based titles. Yardsellr was the first title, and today the company is announcing their second: Style.ly. Style.ly, simply put, is a new social marketplace for women’s fashion. As Yardsellr was formed to be a person-to-person marketplace built on Facebook in which users can connect with other people selling everything from vintage guitars to Hello Kitty collectibles, Style.ly is the same — for fashionistas. (You can see here why Yardsellr has drawn comparisons with eBay — not to mention that Leffel worked at eBay for five years and knows the business well.)  With Yardsellr, users can follow products in their news feed, talk to friends, share, and when they’re interested in making a purchase, move over to Yardsellr.com to use the site’s secure transaction mechanism to complete the sale. Since launching, Yardsellr built out over 4,000 of what it calls “blocks” — or niche communities based on particular interests — in which users can follow, browse, and connect with like-minded people based on their love of vintage guitars, or whatever the case may be. All they have to do to join one of these blocks is “like” it on Facebook. Compare this to traditional eCommerce, which focuses their verticals based on product categories. The former is inherently more communal, social, and geared towards real engagement with actual people. Style.ly was born out of both those “blocks”, and obviously the growing demand for eCommerce platforms that target women’s fashion in particular. Thus, with Yardsellr as the template, Style.ly will become a social platform (based on Facebook) for those who want to buy and sell new, lightly-used and vintage items, from designer labels to boutique finds. Voice is what matters in social commerce, Leffel said, and he’s betting that the Yardsellr model — the one that’s a bit eBay and a bit Etsy — will work well for Style.ly’s target audience, and other niche audiences going forward.  And so far, it seems to be working. In a soft launch of Style.ly, Leffel and team found that more merchandise was sold in the first week on Style.ly than Yardsellr sold in its first four months. As for Yardsellr, since November, the platform has grown steadily at a rate of 35 percent per month in terms of gross merchandise sales (in both the quantity and value of products changing hands).  According to Leffel, on any given day, there are more than 120,000 items for sale through Yardsellr, with 6,000 new items listed for sale each day. What’s more, Yardsellr has grown into a community of over 5 million people, 175K of which are monthly active users. If both titles can sustain that kind of continued growth, it takes the pressure off going big with its series B. Going on from here, naturally, the company plans to add further “studios” for particular interest groups, so that eventually Yardsellr will become the general store-type marketplace for those random odds and ends that will be complemented by Style.ly as well as that future drove of secondary targeted communities (or titles). But why social? Leffel told me that what used to be so special about eBay was that it’s eFlea marketplace lent itself well to the formation of communities that aggregated tightly around particular interests. Those small communities incubated fierce friendships and bonds among those buyers and sellers that loved, say, first edition novels.  Leffel told me that the eBay team used to joke that there were marriages that happened because of those communities. Of course, eBay has gone on to focus more on commoditized goods, to compete with the likes of Amazon and Walmart, but the goal for YellowDog’s properties is to capture the feel of the old eBay — and find that mix between the loneliness of traditional eCommerce transactions and the scalably social aspects of Facebook.  When the social graph meets the interest graph, Leffel said, commerce is a natural byproduct. It certainly seems that the industry is reevaluating its stance on social commerce, and its long term viability, and if this model proves workable in the long run, Yardsellr, Style.ly, and YellowDog seem poised to be close to the front of the pack. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ah, the life of young startups is exciting isn’t it? Pivots. Ramen. Courting investors. A year ago, we covered a fledgling startup called numberFire that is attempting to bring a deep, scientific approach to your fantasy football picks. Not long before our initial coverage, numberFire Founder and CEO Nik Bonaddio won $100,000 from Regis Philbin on the one-and-only “Who Wants To Be A Millionaire”. (Check out Nik’s performance here.) Now, Bonaddio could have taken that money and gone in on a timeshare in Aspen or a one-way ticket to the Caribbean. But, being the pirate that he is, Bonaddio made the bold decision to sink that game show moola right into his startup. Bonaddio first tested the waters with numberFire last year at the TechCrunch Disrupt DemoPit. Since then, Bonaddio says he’s consumed an entire state’s worth of Ramen, Red Bull, and things are starting to look up. The Pittsburgh native and his small team are part of the current summer class at Entrepreneurs Roundtable Accelerator in New York, were able to officially relaunch numberFire earlier this month, and traffic is on the rise. (Monthly actives, the founder tells me, are near the 6-digit range.) What’s more, the startup is currently in the midst of raising a seed round from some top New York investors (we’re hearing that the round will be a touch under $1 million). When numberFire first launched in beta last September, there were still quite a few kinks to work out, and the site wasn’t yet ready for the big time. But a year later, numberFire has come a long way, and for football fans, numberFire is getting close to to being last tool you’ll ever need for your fantasy football picks. Fine, but what exactly does the startup do, you ask? In tandem with broader trends we’re seeing across the consumer web, numberFire is tapping into the ever-more popular content personalization game — by allowing users to customize their football updates, following teams and players that they are interested in — both as fans or as fantasy gamers. NumberFire curates several activity feeds that present the user with the latest activity around their favorite players (like news, updated projections, etc.) that keep them up-to-date and engaged.  Bonaddio is himself a diehard Steelers fan, and so the idea for numberFire came from the simple need to both keep up with his team and give he and his friends a leg up in their fantasy seasons. As more than 20 million people play fantasy football every year, the founder is not alone. Bonaddio set out to create custom, proprietary algorithms that will do all the stat-crunching for you, allowing users to easily import their existing teams from Yahoo or ESPN’s fantasy websites, and quickly get started. But what truly sets numberFire apart is its “cumulative” approach to making projections. In projecting whether or not Eli Manning will fare well this weekend, for example, numberFire might compare Manning’s stats to quarterbacks playing today as well as those that played years ago. The idea is to match Manning’s physical characteristics to others, as well as taking into consideration what particular fields he performs well on, at what times of day, in what conditions, etc. numberFire also takes the Giants’ collective offense into account, what types of plays they run, whether they have a strong running game, and so on, in an effort to decipher whether or not next week’s game at Philadelphia will be a good matchup for Manning (and, by extension, the Giants). But, beyond this holistic approach and its top-down analytics features, numberFire also allows users to crowdsource their decisions and engage other users in conversation through a “Q&A” feature, which capitalizes on a trend started by Quora and StackOverflow. Neither site targets sports fans (or really time-critical questions), so numberFire wants users to take advantage of its Q&A section to receive insight from a community of like-minded individuals. The questions, answers, and ensuing comments all pop up in a user’s curated newsfeed around the players and teams they’re following. Pretty cool. Of course, for a young startup growing a business in the consumer web, it’s all about acquiring and retaining users. numberFire met with some problems early on in this area (like so many before it), so to address this problem, the team has struck partnerships with SB Nation, BleacherReport, CineSport, and other sports media companies to reach a broader audience than it would be able to capture on its own. The startup accomplishes this by offering the ability to embed its data widgets into third-party sites and by delivering video content developed by its team.  The idea here, says Bonaddio, is to begin encouraging sports fans to demand a more thorough analysis from sports media pundits and journalists. And I have to agree with him here. Most sports media today is filled with talking heads and blowhards, whose projections are unreliable, biased, and far from fact-based. BleacherReport writers, for example, can use numberFire’s analytics and projections to drill down into some interesting data in their coverage, rather than relying on fluffy statements like, “Oh, Cam Newton is looking good, Panthers by 7!” With these strategic partnerships, a soon-to-close round of seed funding, and Entrepreneurs Round Table demo day fast-approaching, numberFire has come a long way in the last year, and I’d say is offering a great value proposition for fantasy football enthusiasts and regular old sports fans alike.  Now, if numberFire can just quickly expand to baseball so that I can finally make some money on the Red Sox, then we’ll really have something going. For more, check out numberFire at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily I don’t know about you, but I’m awful at remembering the lyrics to songs, and I often find myself turning to Google search to answer my lyrical questions — and frequently, to lose arguments. Apparently, I’m not alone, as “lyrics” is one of the most searched-for terms on Google. While a quick search is often all one needs to flick on the light switch, overall, lyric search remains a pretty disappointing (and frustrating) experience. There are tons of lyrics sites out there, but most of them are unofficial, don’t have rights to broadcasting free lyrics, or they’re hiding malware.   Founded in 2010, musiXmatch is a startup trying to solve this very problem by building a database of legal song lyrics on the web in the hopes of becoming the IMDB for legal song lyrics. So far, the site has collected over 5.5 million songs (in 18 languages) and is not only building a database that meets with international rights management standards, but it is also developing an API to distribute its lyrics to music publishers, services, app developers, and hackers. Phew. Today, musiXmatch is announcing the official launch of its “musiXmatch Lyrics App” for Mac OSX, which is available for $5 on the App Store. The plug-in enables users to automatically view full screen lyrics for the music they’re currently playing and includes support for iTunes and Spotify.  The widget is still in its early stages, and the team said that it will soon be giving music fans the ability to search for lyrics by artist, song name, or keywords, and browse discography info on albums and artists — and share that info with friends through social networks. (Another cool update coming down the pipeline: Enabling listeners to automatically embed the lyrics into the id3 tag of your songs.)  For iTunes and Spotify users like myself, musiXmatch’s widget is a pretty cool little add-on to the existing listening experience, as it automatically matches your iTunes and Spotify libraries (and automatically opens both), works with both platforms’ “radio” features, allows you to share lyrics to Facebook and Twitter, and receive Growl notifications. (And it works with Lion.) In addition to today’s launch of its iTunes and Spotify compatible iOS plug-in, musiXmatch also shared with us that their mobile applications, which are available on iOS, Android, Symbian, and Windows Mobile, have been downloaded more than 1 million times. Over 50 percent of those users are active on a daily basis. musiXmatch’s mobile solution allows users to easily find and match lyrics for their entire mobile music library, and with desktop availability, a sweet API that lets developers easily distribute kosher lyrics, the startup is becoming a very appealing service for everything from radio streaming platforms and video services to tablet apps and OEM manufacturers. With partnerships that include BMG, Kobalt, Universal Music Publishing Group, and Sony ATV Music, among others, musiXmatch is becoming a very interesting business and platform.  But, what about competition, you say? Well my friends, look no further than TuneWiki. While musiXmatch is an up-and-comer, the well-funded TuneWiki has been going mobile with its lyric-centric social music player for quite some time now. MusiXmatch is, now, essentially the European equivalent. It will be interesting to see how the two vie for marketshare going forward.  Which would you choose, or both? Check ’em out. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Card.io, the mobile commerce company started by two former AdMob employees, Mike Mettler and Josh Bleecher Snyder, is launching a software development kit (SDK) for Android today. The SDK for iOS launched in June, allowing mobile app developers to retrieve credit card information from cards held up in front of the phone’s camera. As of today, the company says that card.io is up-and-running in 80 iOS applications, with 750 developers in total having signed up for the service.  The idea behind card.io is to make the experience of paying for items on mobile easier and faster. Instead of having to manually type in your credit card information, including expiration dates and the CVV code from the back of the card on tiny mobile keyboards, card.io users simply hold up their cards to their phone to pay for purchases. The solution has appeal across industries, including everything from e-commerce to ticketing to daily deal apps to retail. Among the 80 applications supporting card.io for credit card input are social payments platform Venmo, retail app Qthru, plus Newegg, Spotze, EventDay, Clinkle, TaskRabbit, Ambur, InvoiceASAP, BeagleApp, Floktu, WillCall and others. While we were hoping to see several more established applications jump on board with card.io right away, having 80 apps is nothing to sniff at, we suppose. And with 250 developers on board, card.io should become an even more prevalent option soon, at least in niche apps looking to gain traction. Meanwhile, payments company Jumio recently launched a similar service that will work on both desktop and mobile, but uses its own payments network. (Card.io requires developers to use the merchant accounts they already have in place). However, Jumio’s mobile app libraries for iOS and Android won’t go live until later this year, giving card.io the immediate edge in terms of availability. In the long run, though, Jumio’s will be the more complete solution. It will offer not just the scanning and card reading components, but the authorization, processing and fraud prevention features, too. Neither card.io nor Jumio is necessarily “better” –  it just comes down to what a developer needs. Card.io is backed by angel investors Michael Dearing of Harrison Metal, Jeff Clavier and Charles Hudson of SoftTech VC, Manu Kumar of K9 Ventures, Alok Bhanot (former VP, Risk Technology at PayPal), and Omar Hamoui (CEO and founder of AdMob). App developers interested in the new card.io Android SDK can check out the demo available here on the Android Market. More details on the Android SDK are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily With over 200,000 pre-launch signups and 40,000 users in their beta program, it’s very likely that you saw a vizualize.me resume link show up in a friend’s Facebook status update last week when the site soft launched. I know I did. The Toronto based company (and winner of Startup Weekend Toronto 2011, and International Startup Festival’s Top Elevator Pitch) has been gradually taking their resume visualization service live over the last week or so. But they are considering their site fully load tested and “officially” launched today. If you haven’t heard about it yet (unlikely), vizualize.me is a web service that imports your Linkedin resume information and expresses it as an infographic. It’s a neat idea and an appropriate format for the attention-span-challenged medium in which it lives…the Internet. The goal, as CEO Eugene Woo puts it, is to “reinvent the resume by building something more relevant, more visual and more dynamic. One way to do that is by transforming your text resume into an infographic”. I had a chance to speak with Eugene recently and he answered a few questions about vizualize.me that may lend some insight into how the service works and where it is headed. Jay:You describe this way of showing resumes as ‘more dynamic’. What do you mean by that? Eugene:It’s not like a typical resume where you write some lines of text, and that’s it. It’s dynamic. Let me give you an example. Let’s say you are a designer at an agency. [Your resume will graphically show] a block of time that you have worked there—say from 2010 to the present time. From that block I could then link to relevant work that I have done while at that agency. It’s a clean way of showing that info.” Jay:So I’m looking at my resume in vizualize.me. Is this just HTML? Eugene:Well, it’s HTML and also SVG. We are drawing vector graphics. It’s all a DOM element. Jay:So it’s not Flash? Eugene:No, it’s not Flash. God no. (laughs). That would not be cool if we used Flash. Jay:This is interesting to see a resume in this format. You can see the overlap of work and as your career goes forward, you can see how more and more things keep happening at the same time. Eugene:Yeah, and that’s just one way to visualize a timeline [default template]. We are coming up with new themes that visualize the content differently. That default template is what I would call a very ‘traditional’ visualization. We’re coming up with some new templates like a ‘functional’ resume template that’s more focused on skills (like for someone who has many gaps in the timeline and maybe don’t have a typical career). So, all kinds of people will be able to choose from many different themes that would suit their career—certain theme’s could make them look better, I suppose. Jay:So, are you going to let people design their own templates like the way Tumblr has opened their platform up? Eugene:Definitely. We are considering creating a theme marketplace where we let anyone sell their themes. Part of the idea behind calling them themes, is that we had the idea of a theme marketplace similar to Tumblr and WordPress. We’re also building some very basic widgets that will allow a non designer to create some basic visualizations that could be unique. Right now they are all templates that are basically the same. It’s very similar to about.me in that you can customize the colors and the fonts or you can put a background in there. The next step of customization will be to let the user tweak elements of the visualization. How that’s going to happen, I still don’t know yet, but we are working toward that. Jay:The service currently works with Linkedin as the data source. Do you plan to sync with Monster.com or others? Eugene:It currently imports from Linkedin only. I think the next site we work with will be Facebook because people do put their resumes in Facebook believe it or not. As far as other sites are concerned, I don’t really have plans to integrate with Monster or others. We would more likely integrate with social networks like Klout and Twitter. Facebook, Klout and Twitter are basically the three integrations that are on the list and that we will be doing in the near future. So we would visualize your Klout score, we would visualize your Twitter feed. With Facebook, we’re not totally sure if there is anything we can visualize, professionally, but we would integrate with them and pull data, because you can put your work experience in Facebook…so we’ll import that. Jay:You say you may open this service up to let people make their own themes. Is the framework open as well? Will this be based on open source tools? Eugene:Yes, we are designing the system so that we can open it that way eventually. All data is JSON, everything is JSON format. Jay:With regard to your service, designers are a major segment you are targeting right? Eugene:There are a lot of creative people interested in our stuff. Initially that was the case, but now it seems to have pretty wide appeal and I think that’s because people realize that sending a resume is pretty formal…you wouldn’t just send a resume to someone you just met to show your work experience. It would be much easier to say ‘hey, just check out my work experience at vizualize.me’. Someone can get a sense in about 10 seconds of what you do and have done. I think people other than designers appreciate that too. Jay:So it sounds like you creating this tool as much for readers of resumes as you are writers of resumes. Is part of your intention to aid Human Resource groups? Eugene:Yes, it’s both ways. It’s there to help the user tell the story in a much more visual and relevant manner and it’s also for the reader—whether that be an HR professional, manager or peer—so they can size you up easily, at a glance without having to read your 5 page resume. The average resume is more than 2 pages, more than 1000 words and unless you are a professional recruiter, they can be pretty hard to read. There are a a lot of recruiters interested. I’ve talked to a lot of business owners and in fact they wanted us to build infographics and visualization tools for them to filter candidates. We may go there one day but right now our focus is on a consumer product. Jay:Tell me about the genesis of this idea. How did it come to you? Are you from an HR or technical background? Eugene:Originally my background was programming. The idea for this came while I was doing some mobile development consulting. I don’t know if you remember but earlier this year there was one infographic resume by Chris Spurlock that went viral on the Internet. He was a student; graduated in journalism. He had created a visual infographic resume and he had posted it on Facebook. It went viral, had national coverage, was on TV…it really, really blew up. And then he ended up getting a job a Huffington Post. So, it totally worked. It worked beyond Chris’s imagination. When I saw that I was like ‘Holy Crap’. I’ve always loved infographics and at the time I was reading a lot of resumes. I had to hire for all kinds of situations [for the mobile consultancy] and people would send me their 3-4 page resumes and I would barely have time to look at them. So I thought this infographic resume concept could be a really big thing. I thought certainly we can’t beat a designer, but we can surely automate it, put it on the web and make it free (at least some of it for free) or charge a small amount of money and we could have a decent business out of it or at least a pretty popular website. So I had the idea and sat on it for a while and then I pitched it at Start Up Weekend Toronto and we won. In one night we got 5000 signups. The next day, by the time we presented, we were past 5000 signups. I had another presentation at Demo Camp, four days later, and we were past 12,000 signups. So there was obviously lots of demand and this was just the LaunchRock page…it didn’t really have much description. Jay:Are you going to try to replace Linkedin? Eugene:The analogy I would use is that Linkedin is like WordPress and we are trying to be like Tumblr. We are trying to be like the cooler more informal network for resumes. I don’t even want to use the word Social Network because we are not a Social Network…we are a tool basically. There are no social features in our product. Eventually, it’s something we’d like to explore. I wouldn’t say we want to replace Linkedin. In fact we rely on Linkedin right now. We use their login to connect so we have to play nice with them [laughing]. And they have blocked any company or sites that are competing with them…all the big recruiting sites that try to use their content and APIs. And I certainly don’t want that. Jay:And they are allowing you to use the content? You have permission? Eugene:Yeah, right now we are OK but I’m sure if you write an article that says we are going to be the next Linkedin they will definitely block us [we both laugh]. Jay:I definitely don’t want that on my conscience. No but seriously, your strategy could also be about possibly being acquired by someone like Linkedin. Has that crossed your mind? Eugene:Yeah. I would say that would be OK. Being acquired by Linkedin would be OK. We want to complement Linkedin. The stance we have is that we want to complement Linkedin and actually because we use Linkedin exclusively for logins right now and only import data from them…because of that, what we’ve seen is that users are actually improving their Linkedin profiles because of us. So we are actually helping Linkedin in a way. We don’t have all the Social Networking tools that they have and we probably won’t do that. I mean, I don’t really see us going that route. We are a much lighter version. We visualize things like skills, recommendations interests and all that, and most people don’t fill those things in…especially the skills part. Once users figure out ‘hey I can visualize my skills and and build a graph of them’ people actually go in and fill in their Linkedin profiles. So I would say right now we definitely complement Linkedin. Jay:You told me about and Experiment you ran. Can you explain? Eugene:Well, we ran a series of experiments with our beta users. In one we found that—remember the thing I told you about earlier…that vizualize.me users were completing certain incomplete parts of their Linkedin profiles—we found that to be true to some degree. That’s how we found that out. We also found out that beta users want to have different profiles for different purposes. Like for the engineer who is going for a marketing job. Their Linkedin profile will always have their engineering experience but then they want to create a visualization that’s different or that’s more marketing specific. That will probably evolve into a premium feature. We might allow users to have different visualizations for different purposes. Jay:Ah, almost like cover letters. Everyone’s been through that. You spin the same core skills different ways for different jobs. Eugene:Yeah, something like that. If you send a visualization to IBM there might be one view but f you send it to a start up, there might be a different view. Jay:How do you plan on monetizing? Eugene:We intend to roll out premium accounts with the follow features: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Simplee, a Mint-like platform for your healthcare bills, is launching a new feature today that will help simplify the process of paying medical bills.  Just like with Mint and your financial accounts, you give Simplee access to your medical insurance accounts.  It then brings in all of your medical, dental, and pharmacy bills and presents them in an easy-to-understand dashboard.  Simplee tells your total medical costs, how much you’ve paid out-of-pocket, your deductible, and how many doctor’s visits you and your family have had. If you’ve ever looked at an insurance statement, this information isn’t easy to find on these papers. But Simplee lays everything out clearly for users. Simplee is allowing you to pay your bills to health care providers directly from its platform. After linking your medical and dental plans, and connecting a debit card or major credit card, users will automatically receive automated notifications when a bill is ready for review and payment.  Simplee faces competition from Cake Health, which launched to the public last week. Cake Health will also roll out a payment feature soon and is currently testing a bill paying option with a small number of users now.  Simplee actually will track your insurance company’s database and update its platform with a new bill when it becomes available. Via the bill payment feature, you can see what portion of a bill you are responsible for, what should be paid by your insurance and when a payment is due. Support is currently provided for Aetna, Anthem, Blue Cross Blue Shield of California, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, CIGNA, Delta Dental, MetLife, UnitedHealthcare, Vision Service Plan (VSP) and WellPoint (Empire BCBS) with additional plans coming online soon.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past year, Fotopedia has been laser-focused on reinventing the photo book for the iPad.  Now, with 7 apps and 4.8 million downloads under its belt, it is turning its attention back to its website and creating more magazine-like experiences.  Today it is launching Fotopedia Magazine on Flipboard and pushing out a complete overhaul of its website, which is built on HTML5 and designed for tablet and smartphone browsers.  “What we decided was to go to a different level of granularity,” CEO Jean-Marie Huillot tells me, “something that is always fresh, always new, to attract people back to have more engagement.”  The Fotopedia Magazine in Flipboard will highlight five photo essays every day, featuring the high-end photographers who contribute to Fotopedia.  These stories are told mainly through pictures that you can swipe through, with a paragraph of text and captions.  Photo feeds are popular on Flipboard, and in this case Flipboard is creating the new channel from the new @FotopediaMag Twitter feed. When you drill down into an article, it takes you directly to the HTML5 site (within the Flipboard wrapper), which is designed for touchscreens.  But even in a desktop browser, it looks gorgeous and gets you into full-screen slide shows quickly.  Here is  an example of photo essay on Iceland, and another one exploring the Indian state of Rajasthan. I actually prefer going to the Fotopedia site in my iPad browser than going through Flipboard.  Try both and you will see an example of how HTML5 sites can be better than apps.  The navigation is cleaner, and the wrapper doesn’t get in the way.  But Flipboard is still an important distribution partner, and will introduce Fotopedia to a whole new audience.   Fotopedia’s grand ambition is to become the photo encyclopedia of the world.  Its audience is global, with nearly 40 percent in Asia, 30 percent in Europe, and 28 percent in America.  China alone represents 30 percent of its audience.  It has attracted a community of 30,000 photographers and curators, and through its iPad apps offers a way for them to get more exposure and even a little money.   The iPad photo books are popular, with 4.8 million downloads and growing. But once you’ve flipped through one of the books, like the one it did with National Geographic, there is not much reason to pick it up every day.  On average, active users come back twice a month.  The tablet magazine format will get people coming back every day.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It was exactly one year ago today that I wrote up my initial lengthy preview of Instagram. I had a feeling that when it launched, it was going to be big. I underestimated it. Fast forward to today. Instagram is just about to hit 10 million users. They are the nimble upstart that has become the gold standard in the mobile social photo space . Everyone is gunning for them. And so it’s fitting that today, a year after my initial post, they’re unveiling version 2.0 of their app. First, it’s important to note what Instagram 2.0 is not: a completely new app. If the adage “if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” applies to anyone, it applies to Instagram. At its core, what they’ve built is clearly working, so there’s no reason to change that. But the Instagram team realized there was a way to dramatically improve the service while retaining the elements users love. So they set out to completely re-engineer the camera. The aspect of the app where the magic really happens has been completely re-done. When you first load the camera up, you’ll notice that it looks different. The limited settings buttons at the bottom have been replaced by more robust controls along the top of the camera screen. There you’ll find the flash toggle, the ability to flip to the front camera, and the ability to close the camera. But you’ll also find the new tools: border toggle, and a new water drop icon (more on that in a second). Along the bottom of the camera portion of the app, on either side of the shutter, you’ll find the button to load images from your camera roll and a new eye icon. Clicking on this icon alters the Instagram camera to make it so that you can see camera filters in realtime. Yes, you now see what a picture will look with a filter before you take it. How? Instagram has completely re-written the filters to make them as fast as possible. It used to be that you would have to wait a few seconds for a filter to be applied to a photo, even on the quick iPhone 4. Now it’s nearly instantaneous in Instagram 2.0. And this allows them to do live filtering as well. The filters now perform over 200 times faster, co-founder Kevin Systrom says. Other apps, notably Path, have done live filters before. But the performance has left something to be desired. And more recently, Path removed the ability and now focuses on filtering after a picture is taken. To be clear, with Instagram 2.0, you can still filter after a picture is taken as well. If you don’t click on the eye icon, you won’t see the filtering option until after you’ve taken the picture — just like the old days. But what’s really cool is that even if you filter an image before you take the picture, you can change your mind after you take it, and switch the filter. Speaking of filters, yes, there are more of them. Instagram has added four news ones with the 2.0 release: Amaro, Rise, Hudson, and Valencia. Instagram has teamed up with one popular Instagram user to make these and even more down the line. Going back to the water drop icon, this allows you to also tilt-shift in realtime as well. Or you can do it after the picture is taken. This tool has also been re-written to be 100 times faster than before, and it’s now more visually obvious what the focal point is. Once you take a picture, there is also a new option to rotate it, 90 degrees at a time. And again, there’s also now a border toggle to turn off borders for any filter that has them by default. That’s about giving users more control, and along those lines, Instagram is giving users another element many have requested: high-resolution photos. Previously, Instagram would save all photos as 612×612 — now they’re 1936×1936, taking full advantage of the iPhone 4’s camera. But it’s important to note that these high resolutions images are only saved to your camera roll. The images uploaded to Instagram’s servers are still the smaller variety. Instagram says they’re doing this in order to ensure fast upload speeds are maintained and because iOS 5 with Photo Stream will allow people to share higher resolution images that way. With these changes to the camera, Instagram is simply extending upon its lead in the social mobile photo space. The picture-taking process is now much faster and more powerful and that’s a win for all current users. These things will also convert even more non-users over to the service. They’re not changing what’s working, they’re improving upon what’s working. And Instagram’s timing is good. While Google quickly killed off its mobile photo-sharing fledglings, others, like Facebook, are widely expected to get into the game soon. In fact, we’ve seen pictures of their app. Color is also about to pivot to Blue, a new mobile photo sharing app that ties in deeply with Facebook. Other rivals such as Path are said to be working on completely revamped products in the mobile photos space as well. And with the launch of iOS 5 in a few weeks, more developers will be building photo apps with filters than ever before. One more thing: the Android app? No sorry, not yet. But Instgram did get a pretty new iOS icon. You can find Instagram in the App Store here. [image: instagram/thequeenrebel] This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Advise.me is a newly launched startup accelerator and incubator with locations in the San Francisco and New York areas. However, through its “Global Startup Initiative,” the group is encouraging companies to apply no matter where in the world they are located. Advise.me says it will structure things appropriately to work where the startup is based, or it will help the company to relocate to one of its local areas instead. As with most startup accelerators, Advise.me is offering a variety of support services, including help with advisement and execution, marketing, product design, development and infrastructure, business strategy, business development, operational structure, security, accounting, funding and M&A. The initial funding the program offers is independently determined by its investment partners based upon their own criteria, and may not be available to everyone in the program. Startups may receive $6,000-$7,000 per founder or up to $25,000 in total. Says Advise.me, it believes that this is enough funding to allow founders to develop a working prototype or in some cases, to help get them to the next initial stage for receiving larger funding options. In addition to the funding and advisement, startups will receive the following: Although, as noted above, location is not a factor in determining which companies will be accepted into the program, Advise.me says that having a strong and experienced team will help improve its chances. It’s also looking for “compelling offerings that are market disruptive,” and it prefers companies that are past the idea stage and already have a working prototype. Advise.me was co-founded by Solomon Engel (Founder and CEO),  Aaron Anderson (Co-founder and User Interface Designer), Drew Wilson (Co-founder and Principle Designer) and Michel Triana (Co-founder and CTO). It includes an impressive team of advisors, with folks from Google, Facebook, YouTube, Spotify, EA, Sencha, Xero, Sega, Apple, Playdom, Yahoo, Nokia, AOL and several other big-name companies on board as advisors. Besides the team members listed on the Advise.me site now, the company is adding the following new team members today: Indy Guha, VC at Bain Capital Ventures, Rogelio Choy, COO at Formspring, Luca Prasso, Global Character Technical Director at DreamWorks Animation, Eva Diaz-Santana, Senior Cocoa Architect at Apple and Tyler Galpin, User Interface Designer at Advise.me. The accelerator launched at last week’s TechCrunch Disrupt, and is now accepting applications from interested startups. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As predicted in “Mimsy Were the Borogoves,” toys will change the world. Our kids, growing up with computers, game consoles, and endless visual delights, will have different minds than previous generations and their children will be even more unique. After all, our kids are about get get toy 3D printers and there’s no telling what could come next. Origo is a concept product right now but it should be available soon. Clad in purple plastic, the system is a standard extruder-type 3D printer that can make various small objects out of a thin stream of plastic. The founders, Joris Peels and Artur Tchoukanov, are two experienced 3D printing experts. Peels was the community manager for i.materialise and Shapeways. They designed the Origo to have a minimum of moving parts and a simple UI using 3Dtin as a design platform. The Origo describes itself thusly: Right now, I am just an idea. I will be as easy to use as an Xbox or Wii. I’ll be as big as three Xbox 360’s and as expensive as 3 Xbox 360’s. I will sit on your desk and quietly build your ideas, drawings and dreams. There are other 3D printers. But none will be as easy to use as I will. None will be as reliable or work as hard for you. I’m not a kit or an industrial machine. I’m not complicated. I’m an appliance, like a toaster or a microwave. Only I’m purple and make your stuff. No pricing or availability but Joris expects the device to cost about $800. Sadly, they’re not yet funded. “We’re currently speaking to VC’s and other investors but most run like little girls when they find out we actually want to make hardware,” said Peels. Considering Makerbot just grabbed a $10 million investment, these guys should be on the right track. Product Page  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sobees, the startup that develops social newsfeed for the iPadNewsMix, is bringing digital news curation to Facebook via a new app.  The aim of NewsMix is to make sense of the most popular content being shared by your Facebook friends. The NewsMix application for Facebook factors in Facebook “Likes” and brings together articles, photos, and videos posted by liked Pages on Facebook, as well as friends.  Users can like new Pages directly from the application and share their NewsMix articles on their Facebook wall. You can also read your friends’ NewsMix (if they have the app installed), browse the Pages your friends like on Facebook and more. Of course, Facebook is rumored to be launching a new content experience this coming week at F8 and other news organizations are launching social products on the platform, including the Wall Street Journal. The News Corp-owned publication just debuted WSJ Social, a social news reader for Facebook.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily DIY mobile app creator appsbar is launching a new toolkit for garage bands and other budding artists today called “Discography.” With this option, available in the “create new page” section of appsbar’s free app builder, artists can enter in their Artist ID from iTunes or set up a separate payment service to be used for selling their songs. Included with the new toolkit are social sharing functions that allow artists to send out messages to the app’s users when a new track is available for download. The artist can also recommend older songs that are available for download, if they don’t have any new tracks to push. The apps’ users can listen to a 30-second music sample prior to purchasing and that sample can be shared across social networks. Users can also review or comment on the track, and these reviews are available to all the other app users. There’s not much else to the app builder beyond that – it’s a very basic toolkit. Currently, appsbar Discography is an option on iOS only, but will be available on Android soon. Appsbar, which launched in April, now offers DIY app-building services to its community of over than 30,000 users, the company says. Appsbar Discography competes with more fully featured products, like Mobile Roadie, Kyte, and others, but the difference is, appsbar is free. That said, the old adage that you “get what you pay for” seems to apply here. Appsbar’s apps aren’t much to look at, but for starving artists, this may be all they can afford. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFormer Intuit CEO Bill Harris Launches Personal CapitalBill Harris has spent his entire career at the nexus of the financial and technology industries, first as the CEO of Intuit, then PayPal, and then as an investor over the past decade.  Now he is bringing all of his experiences together in his latest startup Personal Capital, which is launching today after two years in development with 40 employees and $27 million in capital.  (He explains the concept to me in the video above).  Personal Capital connects to all of your personal financial accounts from banks, brokerages, and 401(k)s to mortgages, credit cards, and loans.  It presents your financial life in easy to read charts and graphs like Mint, except that its overarching goal is to help you come up with the best asset allocation and convince you to manage your money through one of its financial advisers. The analytics are free, but the financial advisers are not. Personal Capital charges a management fee of just under 1 percent of assets managed, which is all-inclusive of brokerage and other fees.  “In some ways Silicon Valley does not really get it about financial services,” Harris tells me.  “We think software is the answer to everything. Financial services doesn’t get it either,they don’t use technology to augment their interactions with customers.” Personal Capital is targeting affluent households with a few hundred thousand to a few million dollars to invest.  That is above the level where mutual funds will suffice, but below the threshold of private money managers who focus on people with investable assets of $5 million or above.  By bringing in data from all of your financial accounts, Personal Capital promises to give you a complete picture of your financial situation.   Its full-time financial advisers can use the same data to create an investing strategy and asset allocation plan.  They also find ways to defer gains and harvest losses to minimize taxes.  Harris estimates that each financial adviser will be able to serve between 100 and 200 clients thanks to all the heavy lifting done by the site. The site shows all of your accounts and your asset allocation across them (stocks, bonds, cash, etc.)  It lets you see the big picture in handsome charts, along with the transaction details below.  At a glance—assuming you have all of your accounts hooked up—you can see your net worth, cash postion, and investment allocation. If you decide to allow a Personal Capital financial adviser to manage some of your money, they will craft a personal portfolio just for you.  “Mutual funds used to be a good idea, no more,” declares Harris.  The cost of trading stocks and bonds is now so low that the economies of scale that mutual funds offer (with one portfolio for everyone) are no longer an advantage.  Harris thinks he can bring mass customization to investing by using a combination of software and human advisers.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new startup is throwing its hat into the mobile video sharing and discovery space this morning—Klip. Klip’s newly launched free  app allows users to capture, share, discover and view mobile videos. While many mobile video apps focus on the capture, editing and sharing of videos, Klip’s focus is on the discovery and providing the highest quality video streaming around for mobile device. You simply shoot a new ‘Klip’ or grab one from your Camera Roll and share it with the Klip community, your friends on Facebook, Twitter, on your YouTube channel, or by email. Within the app, you can watch Klips from around the world, follow other Klippers, re-klip the Klips you think are worth sharing again, or stay on top of hot topics by following hashtags. All sharing is built around hashtags, making it easy to surface relevant content by topic or event. Of course, there are a plethora of video sharing apps in the market but what makes Klip more unique is the technology used in the app. If you want to preview a vide, you can Swipe the video and it will plat at the accelerated speed at which you move your finger across the video. If you shake the phone, all the videos will begin playing on the page. The design of the app itself is fairly sleek, with an easy to use UI. And because mobile bandwidth can be flaky, Klip includes adaptive video streaming. The app will actually check and adapt streaming to your bandwidth once every 4 seconds. The startup was actually founded in April 2011 by Alain Rossmann, and has raised $2 million in funding from Matrix Partners and Rossmann (who is credited with being the father of wireless access protocol, WAP). The company’s team includes engineers and staff from Google, YouTube, Yahoo, and Apple. Klip faces competition from Vlix, SocialCam and others. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Magisto, which offers a cloud-based video editing service, is launching its tool in public beta today, in an effort to “make your videos worth sharing”. The company is also announcing that it has raised a $5.5 million Series B Round led by Hong Kong billionaire Li Ka-shing’s private investment arm, Horizons Ventures, with earlier backer Magma Venture Partners participating. Magisto is an intriguing product. It basically takes unedited video footage and automatically – as in, without the help of actual people – turns it into short movies that are more fit for sharing with others. Users can select up to 16 video clips (or up to 600 MB) to upload, pick a title, select music, and with the click of a button, Magisto will try to find the best footage in the videos and edit them into short movies ready to be shared on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, or via email.  It’s worth noting that Magisto’s proprietary technology apparently goes far beyond facial recognition – the company claims its video editing tool understands the difference between people, pets, backgrounds, objects, behaviors and landscapes and is even capable of inferring a user’s ‘intent’ by analyzing the sounds and images on the video.  The company says all major video formats (MOV, ASF, AVI, FLV, MP4, etc.) are supported. As they say: the proof is in the pudding. Go check it out and tell us if Magisto works as advertised.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily MyHeritage.com, a relatively heavily-funded Israeli startup operating a huge family-based social network, this morning announced that it has acquired BackupMyTree, which enables people to automatically backup their family history for free. This is the sixth acquisition by MyHeritage.com – recent purchases include Germany’s OSN , Poland’s Bliscy.pl and Dutch Family Network ZOOOF. One year after launching, BackupMyTree’s backup service is said to protect over 9 TB of family tree data off-site, uploaded by genealogists and family history enthusiasts. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed, but don’t expect this to be a huge deal: the BackupMyTree team is promptly moving on to a new venture dubbed Mocavo, a free genealogy search engine. Coincidentally, BackupMyTree is the second company that MyHeritage.com has purchased from entrepreneur Cliff Shaw, having acquired Pearl Street Software, makers of GenCircles.com and Family Tree Legends, back in 2007. MyHeritage.com, which boasts an international registered member base of 60 million users and offers its services in 38 languages, says it will continue to maintain the service and keep it free. The company says its is now home to more than 800 million profiles and 20 million family trees. MyHeritage.com is backed by Index Ventures and Accel Partners. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Local recommendations mobile app Alfred has arrived in a new, iPad-optimized format (iTunes) which includes deeper integration with Facebook. The optional Facebook Connect sign-in feature enables Alfred to better learn about its users’ preferences by mining Facebook data for likes and check-ins. Alfred, which comes from a startup called Clever Sense, is focused heavily on its use of algorithms to surface recommendations as a differentiating factor between it and other, similar applications. Previously, Alfred based its recommendations for restaurants, bars, coffee shops and nightclubs on a quick “taste profile” created for users through a short quiz upon launch. After answering a few questions, the app would produce (in our experience, at least), relatively accurate results, if, in some cases, fairly obvious ones. It was interesting, however, to see the details as to why you would like result X or Y, instead of seeing just the recommendation itself. Now Alfred will tell you even more information about its interest graph, informing you that, for example, “91% of people out of 650 like this place,” alongside each recommendation.  And the stream of recommendations is no longer limited to 10, as it was at launch. You can now scroll through all the recommendations for a given area, sorted by your interests. Also new is an optimized Google Maps view that plots all your recommendations on a map for easy access. Before, individual recommendations could only be viewed on the map one-by-one. But the most interesting update has to do with the added Facebook data-mining feature, which arrives in the iPhone version, too, as do all the new features. Now, when you tag a place in a Facebook status update (this is the new format for the Facebook “check-in,” by the way), Alfred knows this and asks you later to rate it using simple buttons like a “thumbs up” and “thumbs down.” Soon, it will do the same for Facebook Likes. Foursquare integration is next, we’re told, followed by Twitter (via geotags and mentions).  Local recommendations alone aren’t the end-game for Alfred, though. It will soon begin to use its artificial intelligence and machine-learning algorithms to start recommending local deals, too, also based on your interests. Given the increasing number of daily deals and other Groupon-like services, it makes sense that a recommendations engine like Alfred would begin to offer some sort of deal curation service like this on top of its business recommendations. Alfred won’t talk exact download numbers for its app, but says they “exceeded expectations,” when the app passed 100,000 downloads a month ago. User engagement is high, the company notes, with active users interacting with the app 3 times per week, with an average rate of 1.8 times per week for everyone else. The new iPhone/iPad app is available on iTunes here. An Android version will be launched in the future.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fresh with new funding, Buddy Media, a company that provides Facebook Page and social media management tools to brands, is launching ConversionBuddy, a data and analytics platform for brand marketers. Buddy Media provides an all-in-one social media management system to help create, manage and track social campaigns on Facebook. The platform lets brand managers agencies create, manage and track Facebook pages in a variety of languages to drive and increase user and brand engagement. Users don’t need to have any prior FBML knowledge to create pages on Facebook and can create sleek and interactive pages fairly easily. ConversionBuddy allows brands to track connections to boost conversions by gaining insight into the number of shares, tweets, conversions and more. So brands can segment data by demographic and even determine which audience segment shares social content most frequently and which audience generates the most traffic and revenue per share. The new product will also show marketers which content and features are most popular and how they travel across multiple social networks, which social networks and emails generate the highest revenue per share and more. ConversionBuddy is actually a result of Buddy Media’s acquisition of social commerce and analytics startup Spinback earlier this year. The company just raised $54 million in Series D funding led by GGV Capital with Institutional Venture Partners, Bay Partners and Insight Venture Partners. And Buddy Media’s revenue has more than doubled since the end of 2010, and could be as high as $40 million.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInGuidance for FoundersCarla Holtze is the co-founder of Have-to-Have, which is officially launching later this week. She calls it “a digital shopping platform” that allows consumers “to save, share and shop for any product that they find across the web.” Carla signed-up for Founder Office Hours with Hunch co-founder Chris Dixon and First Round Capital’s Josh Kopelman. Her first question for Kopelman and Dixon revolved around establishing a marketplace: “Attracting users then would make me more attractive to the strategic partners… do I focus [on attracting users or] on really acquiring retailers who then bring with them the user base? Kopelman is well versed in “the chicken and egg in supply and demand” problem while creating a marketplace having launched Half.com back in the day (which was acquired by eBay for $350 million). He told Holtze, “It sounds to me like you have a little bit of a benefit in which your consumers can get real utility and actually use the service even if the brands aren’t there.” Kopelman noted, “you can still satisfy the users and then use the users to bring the brands on board.” Dixon agreed. He told Holtze “the winning strategy” seemed to start with the “consumer side.” Holtze also wanted advice heading into her seed round. Kopelman suggested Holtze distinguish her company from “the other players in the space.” Dixon picked up with “whether you like it or not, investors, the press, etc… they always end up sort of pegging you to something else … and so you might as well get ahead of it.” Kopelman finished by saying the current landscape for raising money should work to her advantage. “There are enough seed funds now that you might be able to sort of find one and let them be your anchor.” Holtze lobbed one final question about creating exclusivity for her site. Kopelman noted that while creating a “velvet rope” worked in some cases, “the velvet rope only works when you have a product that people really love.” Make sure to watch past episodes of Founder Office Hours featuring Profitably, Dispatch.io, Schedit, Napkin Labs and Madbrook Publishing. Prior episodes of Founder Stories are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Bitcasa, a new cloud storage provider, was met with a healthy dose of skepticism last week when it claimed to be able to provide “infinite storage.”  How does it do that? It can’t do what it promises! That’s not how encryption works! And so on. VC firm Andreessen Horowitz, along with First Round Capital, Pelion Venture Partners, and TechCrunch founder Michael Arrington’s CrunchFund have invested $1.3 million in the technology, which seems to suggest there’s valuable IP behind the startup’s overly broad promises of cheap, infinite and secure storage. My initial review of the startup was generally positive because, by all descriptions, it’s doing something innovative and new. While we raised a few general questions (does it slow you down?, will it scale?), it’s hard to review something without going hands-on. For that matter, describing the way the technology works was perhaps overly simplified. For those of you with interest in deeper technical details, here they are (well, it’s a start, at least…). As a finalist, Bitcasa got drilled by knowledgeable judges including Ron Conway, Hadi Partovi, Marissa Mayer, Roelof Botha, Matthew Cohler and Arrington. Hadi Partovi was on the founding teams of Tellme and iLike. As an angel investor and startup advisor, Hadi’s portfolio includes Facebook, Zappos, Dropbox, OPOWER, Flixster, Bluekai, and many others. Like you, he wanted to know how Bitcasa’s encryption worked. To see how Bitcasa CEO Tony Gauda answered those questions, scroll to minute 11:48 of the video at the bottom of the post.  But his main explanation is that Bitcasa takes advantage of a technique called convergent encryption, which he explains towards the end before being cut off. Here’s the transcript of the relevant portion of the conversation. HP: What  do you do in terms of encryption or security? TG: We encrypt everything on the client side. We use AES-256 hash, SHA-256 hashing for all the data. HP: So it’s encrypted all on the client side and you can’t look at it on the server side? TG: Exactly. HP: So if I upload a file and Marissa uploads the same file, do you store two different copies of that or one? TG: No, we do de-duplication on the server side. So we actually determine on the server side if it’s there, and if it’s already there, we don’t have to upload it again. HP: But how do you do that…if it’s encrypted and you don’t have the key? TG: There’s an academic paper called Convergent Encryption. This is actually something that’s been known for many years in the encryption community. But what we actually do is…we don’t encrypt it in the way that you think we’re doing it….There’s other ways to do it. HP, giving a weird look: OK.  (Audience giggles.) Paul Carr: I think the audience would like to know a little more about that…what does that mean? TG: OK, so convergent encryption….what happens is when you encrypt data, I have a key and you have a key. And let’s say that that these are completely different. Let’s say that we both have the exact same file. I encrypt it with my key and you encrypt it with your key. Now the data looks completely different because the encryption keys are different. Well, what happens if you actually derive the key from the data itself? Now we both have the exact same encryption key and we can de-dupe on the server side. (Microphone gets really loud at the end). TG: See how powerful that was? That was powerful! (Audience laughs). TG: This is convergent encryption. We didn’t invent this. We invented all types of other things to make this thing awesome. There’s been a lot of talk about “hey, how do you do this?” And the trolls are coming out on Slashdot… Paul Carr: OK, stop pitching. Latest headlines delivered to you daily [tc_speakertext_off]We have hours and hours of quality video from this year’s Disrupt SF, and you can browse it all over at TCTV, but there were a few on-stage interviews and discussions that we felt were unmissable. Whether they’re funny, interesting, or controversial, these show the quality and variety of the guests and topics we get to feature at Disrupt. Click the titles to view the original posts with our summary and commentary, as well as transcripts of the videos. The rest of the conference can be found at our Ultimate Guide to Disrupt SF. A Year After “AngelGate”, More Angelic Angels Descend Upon Disrupt This all-star panel of VCs and (perhaps former) angel investors was consistently interesting and entertaining. Arrington moderates as Ron Conway, Dave McClure, Jeff Clavier, Josh Felser, and Aydin Senkut dispute the best way to help and fund entrepreneurs. Capped vs. uncapped, VC vs. angel, due diligence vs. whatever the opposite of due diligence is. The end was inspiring, as Conway instructed anyone there from SV Angel to help the long line of entrepreneurs building up at the question mics. He then went down to the show floor and braved the frenzy himself. Max Levchin And Peter Thiel: Innovation Today Is Between ‘Dire Straits And Dead’ This talk was controversial among our readers. Could a guy who urged people to drop out of school and a guy who made Facebook games really speak to the question of “hard problems”? The discussion on the stage is interesting whether you buy their premise or not. Our commenters bring up some very salient points as well, which you can read at the original post. Is Facebook Copying Google+ And Twitter? VP Of Engineering, Mike Schroepfer, Responds There have been allegations that Facebook has, shall we say, had a spurt of inspiration following the unveiling of Google+. Mike Schroepfer is given the chance to defend their new features here, and to explain some recent decisions to change or eliminate features. And of course, it’s fun to put companies on the spot when we’ve got inside information. In this case Jason brings up the unannounced iPad app and Facebook Music. The subsequent “death stare” is pure gold. Elon Musk: Starting A Company Is Like Staring Into The Face Of Death The mega-rich investing in space travel are often written off as modern-day Don Quixotes with too much money on their hands. I myself have done so. But Elon Musk isn’t some lunatic miser, building expensive toys to satisfy his vanity. He and others like Jeff Bezos and Richard Branson are investing where the industry fears to tread. I love the dispassion with which he refers to astronauts as “biological cargo.” And on a more grounded topic, Musk’s comparison of our education system to the vaudeville era is simultaneously esoteric and insightful. Sequoia’s Doug Leone On Entrepreneurs, Billions, CrunchFund, And His Hatred Of Photographs For someone who’s been with Silicon Valley veteran Sequoia for over 20 years, you’d think Doug Leone would cut more of a visible profile in the valley. Despite his seeming reticence to publicize himself and his company’s funds, he’s candid here. His perspective is slightly detached, as one who perceives the beginning and end of his investments, and his commentary is astute. More of an insider than many insiders, yet thinking outside the outsiders. TC Disrupt: Office Hours With YC Partners Paul Graham And Harj Taggar Paul Graham’s Y Combinator “office hours,” in which YC company founders get brief but to the point advice from this startup wizard, was a hit in New York, so we were looking forward to the sequel. Graham didn’t disappoint, doling out encouragement, criticism, and sage advice in general to entrepreneurs who were at a loss. Worth a watch if only for the looks of intense attention maintained by Graham and YC partner Harj Taggar practically the entire time. That’s as many videos as I dare embed without risking browser implosion, so if you’re looking for more video, go to TCTV’s Disrupt channel and start scrolling. Latest headlines delivered to you daily So now, less than five years later, you can go up on a steep hill in Las Vegas and look West, and with the right kind of eyes you can almost see the high-water mark —that place where the wave finally broke and rolled back. – Hunter S. Thompson, Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas I’ll get right to the point: this is my last post on TechCrunch. And it’s my resignation letter. The first resignation letter I’ve ever written, in fact. Usually I get fired. To those who have been following the recent TechCrunch drama, this post won’t come as much of a surprise. A little over a week ago I wrote that, unless Mike Arrington was allowed to choose his own successor as editor of TechCrunch, I would no longer write for the site. Sure enough, this past Monday, a statement from AOL announced Erick Schonfeld as the new editor. A lot of outside observers assume that Schonfeld, who has been with TechCrunch since 2007, was Mike’s choice to take over. But, in the interests of transparency, it’s important to clarify what really happened. The truth is, Erick was Arianna Huffington’s choice, not TechCrunch’s. What I knew last week, but can only write now, is that while Heather, Mike and other senior editorial staffers were making a stand for the site’s editorial independence from The Huffington Post, Erick cut a side deal with Huffington to guarantee him the top job once Mike was gone. The irony is that had Erick stayed strong for just a few days, he’d would have been appointed interim editor anyway, with Mike’s blessing. Mike and Heather were even considering Erick for the permanent position but had concerns about his ability to retain (in Fred Wilson’s words) TechCrunch’s “swagger“. Mike felt that current Senior Editor Sarah Lacy might be a better choice: she has the right personality — and sources — for the job and she actually lives in Silicon Valley (Erick is based in New York). Unfortunately she’s also away for four months, on maternity leave. The curious thing is that Erick knew everyone at TechCrunch supported him, at least for the interim role. And yet when Arianna called, he answered. Mike and I spoke at the time and he gave me his take on the deal: “at the point Erick began negotiating with Arianna instead of standing firm with the rest of us, he became nothing more that Arianna’s pet. All hope for independence with him at the lead became lost”. (Mike asked me to keep our conversations confidential until the situation was resolved.) Not three days after his appointment, Erick made his first ethics disclosure as TC’s new editor — insisting that Mike had played no part in the selection of TechCrunch Disrupt finalists. Bluntly put, that was not true — as Mike had to clarify in the comments… “Erick… Please be careful making statements on my behalf. And remember that reader trust is what matters. You shouldn’t say “he was not involved in the final selection of these companies” just because it sounds nice. Since it isn’t true, you shouldn’t say it at all.” One of these two men is your new ethical champion, Arianna. The other one is the guy you fired. For what it’s worth — and this is the point in this post where I suspect Mike and I will part company — I still have a lot of time for Arianna Huffington. I was the first TechCrunch writer to celebrate her appointment as Editor in Chief of AOL and I still stand by much of what I wrote in my post welcoming Our Huffington Overlord. In this situation, though, I think she screwed up badly by allowing her growing personal animosity towards Mike — and, let’s be clear, this fight was almost entirely personal — to rule her head, ejecting Mike completely from the company he founded and installing his polar opposite as a puppet editor. As Barry Diller put it on Wednesday: “So now, he’s gone, and now they own this thing, which has no voice. Congratulations. What a good piece of business.” Putting aside my professional feelings towards Erick — and I’ve been writing about those for a long time — the notion that a Silicon Valley blog should be run by a guy in New York is just ludicrous. As such, Huffington’s short-term victory is likely to prove a medium and long term disaster. Still, even as I was writing the words above, I found my anger towards Erick fading. Despite the fact that he fucked over Mike and Heather — and, by extension, the whole of TechCrunch — I don’t think he’s a bad guy. There are times, in fact, when I positively like him: he works hard, crosses the t’s and is a fine, and experienced, analytical reporter. He’s just — what’s the word? — hapless. He is a man utterly devoid of ‘hap’. Hating him for being expertly played by Arianna Huffington is like hating a baby for crying on a long-haul flight. He doesn’t understand why people are mad at him, he just wants to be fed. Towards the end of my last book I wrote about the importance of having loyalty to one’s friends and of knowing when to quit. The former principle literally saved my life while the latter I’ve never quite got the hang of — dragging out relationships, jobs, a drinking problem… sentences… to beyond snapping point. This time, though, I think I’ve learned my lesson. This past TechCrunch Disrupt was the best yet — a fitting tribute to Mike, and a lasting reminder of why he and Heather made (make) such a perfect team. Under Heather’s guidance the business of TechCrunch will continue to grow; and thanks to the site’s amazing editorial staff, the scoops and page views will keep on flowing both at home and abroad. But with Mike’s departure, the gonzo spirit that first drew me to TechCrunch — that desire to not just report the story, but to be part of it — has gone. And with it my confidence that if the shit starts flying, my editor will be there holding an umbrella. I really can’t over-emphasize how much Mike, as an editor, made writers feel like he had their back. (Amusingly, I just looked back at my first ever column for TechCrunch and it contains this paragraph… The Editorial independence thing was particularly important to me. TechCrunch is a publication that never shies away from a good story, which sometimes means it makes embarrassing or amusing mistakes. I called out these mistakes with glee when I was at the Guardian, and I see no reason why I should stop now. Or to put it another way, the next time Erick asks the question “Did Last.fm just hand over listening data to the RIAA?” I need to be able to say “no, you idiot” without fear of reprisals. ) Back in February, when Paul Miller quit AOL-owned Engadget, I smugly schooled him on the five rules of effective stunt resignation. Revisiting that list today, I think I pretty much nailed rules one through three (Go Out In A Blaze Of Glory, Have A Specific Grievance, Timing Is Everything). Which just leaves numbers four and five. Rule Four: “There’s No One Else Involved” Since the Wall Street Journal reported my imminent resignation earlier in the week, plenty of folks have asked what I plan do next. Do I have another job already lined up? The answer is no. Once I hit “publish”, I’ll be without a regular writing gig for the first time in five years. This is both terrifying and exciting in equal measure. Sometimes you just have to hurl yourself off the cliff and see if anyone tries to catch you. Rule Five: Find Someone Else Within A Week For all of my pseudo-martyrdom, though, the hard fact is that TechCrunch was my regular gig, but not my only one. My “real” job is writing books, usually about myself — and believe me, the last few weeks have offered enough material for an epic — and tragicomic — tale. Don’t be surprised if you hear more on that subject soon. (You do follow me on Twitter, right?) In addition to book ideas, there are two other potentially very exciting things floating around in my head — either one of which might make for an exciting next chapter of my career. According to my own rules, though, I’ve got seven days of due diligence left before I need to say more. So I won’t. Except this: thank you Mike. Thank you for always having my back, and please know I’ll always have yours. The worst days working for you were still more interesting and fun than the best days working for anyone else. I hope we’ll get the opportunity to do it again soon. Thank you to Heather for setting the inspiration bar so high that no future boss will ever quite measure up. Thank you (not for the first time) to Sarah Lacy for being my eternal voice of reason, and to Jon Orlin for the unflagging support — you guys made my days in the office more fun than is healthy. Thank you, in fact, to the entire TechCrunch team for being wonderful colleagues, and great friends; I’m going to miss the shit out of working with all of you. (Except for Jack McKenna: fuck that guy.) And thanks finally to all of the TechCrunch readers who made it through my columns these past two-plus years. I genuinely appreciate your eyeballs and your brains, and I’ll miss the vast majority of you very much indeed. And yet. And yet. *Click* *Publish* Update from Editor Erick Schonfeld: I accept your resignation. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re advertising a product, would you rather simply have an image of that product, or have your consumers be able to watch a video of that product in action? Unless you’re sarcastic like myself, you probably answered with the latter, because the truth is that videos help products sell online. This is true even for those vendors that sell products that one wouldn’t necessarily assume would be made more attractive with video. Consider Zappos, for example, which currently offers over 50,000 product videos. Zappos also happens to do a pretty good business.  For SellStage, a startup from this summer’s batch of Y Combinator companies that is launching today, Zappos is the standard. But most big eTailers are far behind the shoe seller in terms of video content. So SellStage is launching a platform that is designed to make it easy for both big and small businesses to add video content to their websites to showcase their products.  Product videos tend to be different enough from other video content that it needs a specific, if not niche, solution. Videos also tend to be a pain in the ass to integrate with product pages, as you can’t just take your normal embed approach, because it will take up too much space, and may even displace the product images. So, SellStage wants not only host and stream your product videos, but also play them in a lightbox. So after your product video plays, you want a call to action, not simply a replay link. Of course, SEO is critical eCommerce sites, and that most product videos don’t take this into account, so SellStage automatically generates sitemaps optimized for video search crawlers. On the merchant side, SellStage offers great value proposition in that all you have to do is add one line of Javascript to the product page, and the startup handles the rest, the players, the hosting, and the streaming. You can then drag and drop your videos where you want them, all with a few clicks.  What’s more, SellStage videos work on iOS devices, which a lot of product videos don’t because they use Flash. The startup is also working on tools to make video production easier, including this forthcoming iOS app, and some “you shoot, SellStage edits”-type features.  The startup, while still in its early form, is going to be very useful to marketing departments who want to manage video on their eCommerce platforms, especially for those who have a large product catalog and want to add 500+ videos and not have those turn into 500 IT requests.  “Retailers who consider their expertise a competitive advantage need to find a way to use their greatest asset – their knowledgeable sales staff”, SellStage Co-founder Tom Saffell said. “To differentiate their online stores from everyone else. Video lets them do that”. Retailars already have everything they need to make great video: The store is set, the sales staff are the actors, and the script is whatever you say to the customers in store — your sales pitch, says Co-founder Thomas Escourrou.  But how is SellStage going to monetize? The Co-founders told me that they are going to establish a tiered pricing structure that takes into account how many videos the company wants to make, host, and stream, and whether or not they want production assistance from SellStage itself. As the startup moves forward, it also will begin giving its customers more customization options. SellStage is launching in private alpha today, but is making 50 priority invites available to readers. Simply visit the startup’s homepage and enter “concorde” for a sneak peek. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s a new concept for social networking services taking root, and it’s not about re-creating your offline social graph on the Web, like Facebook does today. It’s about discovering the people who are nearby you now – the ones you probably would like to meet. This type of discovery mechanism is already being made possible by a number of services, including the checkin apps like Foursquare and Gowalla, the automated discovery of nearby folks via Sonar and Banjo, the group chatting in Yobongo, and the micro-networks that emerge through LoKast. All of these companies are playing with the idea of location-based social networks, attempting to connect you to others around you through varying means. At this week’s TechCrunch Disrupt conference in San Francisco, even more services emerged to compete in this space, too. The powerful capabilities of today’s mobile smartphones are allowing for a new kind of networking: social discovery services, not social networking services. Discovery services are focused primarily on highlighting the users within close proximity to you and connecting you to those who you might want to meet. Facebook, meanwhile, aims to connect you to people you already know. “Discovery” on Facebook is limited to searching for names or networks (e.g., schools, workplaces) where the introductions themselves previously took place. But there are ephemeral, ever-changing social networks that we participate in daily. These have been left largely untapped by Facebook: the people working out at the gym, shopping for groceries, playing basketball, taking their dog to the park, watching their children on the playground, and so on. They’re the networks you stumble into and out of every day, and they aren’t composed of your close friends, Facebook friends or otherwise. They’re just people who share your interests at that same moment in time. The guy ready for a pick-up game of b-ball. The coupon-clipper finding deals at the grocery store. A new puppy’s owners hoping for a doggie play date. A couple of standout apps from Disrupt hope to better highlight these types of networks by introducing you to the people you want to know. One, an app called Holler (iTunes), is based around interests and activities. You join a group (surfers, for example) and the app pushes notifications to you when others nearby are interested in the same thing. For now, the groups are pre-built by Holler itself, but it’s in the process of rolling out a system where users can build their own groups. However, there will be some level of filtering and control, so duplicate groups are not created.  Holler is well-designed, with a clean and minimalist layout, which makes it easy to use from first launch. Unfortunately, it suffers from the same problem many other “social” apps do at first – not enough people are using it. To address the issue, Holler’s creators are thinking of exposing all the groups to the app’s users, not just those nearby, which would still allow for socializing around interests. While that may increase engagement, it takes away from the app’s core promise of proximity-based socializing – its mobile meetups on the fly. In a similar vein, another TechCrunch Disrupt Startup Alley company, Mingle, has built a mobile app that also aims to connect users based on interests. But in Mingle’s case, it’s about introducing yourself to others nearby, in the hopes that you two share an interest, instead of connecting around a commonly held interest like “shopping” or “exercise,” for example.  Mingle users fill out an introduction card and post it to their current location. Others “mingling” at that location can see one another, and take the conversation offline, if desired. It’s what Foursquare could do, if it wasn’t so stuck on listing the “others here” with only an avatar and a first name, last initial (arguably useless information, unless those people are already real-life friends). A third app from the Startup Alley is a little more out there, but interesting. Called igobubble, this mobile app lets you leave virtual “bubbles” containing text, photos, videos, music and more at a given location. Others can come along later and find your bubble and interact with it, or even change it. You’ll see who has “touched” your bubble and can then chat with them in real-time. There’s more too it than that, but those are the basics.  igobubble feels more art project than the next big hit in mobile socializing, but at least they’re thinking out of the box. Instead of just re-creating the structure of a traditional social networking site (with profiles, listed interests, avatars), it’s thinking that tying content to a location is the first step in enabling mobile social discovery. That’s certainly a different take. It’s not about who you are, it’s about what you did at that location. Other intriguing ideas in the location-based social space included Disrupt Startup Alley participant Evertale, makers of a mobile app that will map photos to locations for the purpose of instant scrapbooking and remembering old friends, and Audience Choice winner CardFlick, a contact-sharing app for nearby users.  But have any of the new apps (or old ones, for that matter), really hit the nail on the head when it comes to social discovery? Banjo and Sonar are great, but feel more like tools than networks of their own. Yobongo’s chat seems a bit lacking without context. Holler’s mobile meetups can’t work if it can’t gather enough participants. Mingle feels more business-networking driven than social. igobubble is an interesting idea, but doesn’t have the execution down. It seems like each service could be a part of a bigger whole – a new proximity-based social network that puts location first, people and content second. A new network no one has yet been ambitious enough to attempt to design, so focused on a single niche or feature instead. Foursquare, at least, has the critical mass to get there, but is stagnating with its continued emphasis on the manual check-in. The company should be increasing automation for regular check-ins, building out user profiles and letting users connect via common interests surfaced by their regular activities. It should suggest new friends based on behaviors combined with “friend-of-a-friend connections.” At the very least, when a big group of friends check-in together, it should alert the users in the group who aren’t connected to each other of the missed opportunity. It should even consider letting users pick and choose add-on services to run within the app. Yobongo’s chat, CardFlick or Mingle’s introductions, and igobubble’s content sharing could all be Foursquare features one day, and not standalone applications, if Foursquare had a wider vision for its future. In the meantime, it’s fun to experiment with the latest and greatest in proximity-based social networking, thanks to the new TechCrunch Disrupt Alley startups mentioned here and others. Whether any of them will become breakout hits, however, will have to be left for the market to decide. Credit: Top image via Mingle Latest headlines delivered to you daily As we reported yesterday, social media dashboard company  HootSuite had raised a new round of funding, according to an SEC filing. We’ve confirmed the funding with the company, and today, the startup is announcing a $3 million raise from previous investors and new investor, Millennium Technology Ventures. HootSuite has previously raised $1.95 million from Blumberg Capital, Hearst Ventures and Geoff Entress.  HootSuite offers brands and businesses a comprehensive social media dashboard that allows teams to collaboratively schedule and monitor updates to Twitter, Facebook, Linkedin, WordPress and other social networks via web, desktop or mobile platforms. Via the application, HootSuite users can also track campaign results, analytics and other data. The company is also announcing  a new ‘strategic acquisition’ of social storage and reporting startup TwapperKeeper.com. TwapperKeeper helps academic organizations, conference leaders, marketing departments, customer service teams and PR companies to archive, track, monitor, and analyze Twitter data.  Basically, TwapperKeeper allows users to archive tweets by hashtag, keywords, or person, and offers an API as well. The app will be integrated into HootSuite’s dashboard.  By way of history, TwapperKeeper ran into some trouble with Twitter earlier this year for violating the network’s terms of service.  This follows previous acquisitions of SwiftApp (now HootSuite for Android), and TwitterBar, which enables users to post to a variety of social networks straight from the web address bar (now HootBar). HootSuite, which now has over 2.5 million users is a profitable, and has a $8 million run rate (estimated $10 million by end of year). The company will use the new funding to make acquisitions, for sales and marketing efforts and for hiring. The company has also added Steve Johnson (former VP of Channel Partners from Constant Contact and Blackbaud) as chief revenue office; Darren Suomi (formerly at SAP and Business Object) as VP of Sales and Greg Gunn as VP of Business Development.  Similar to social media app Seesmic, HootSuite started as a third-party Twitter app, but has found a viable business offering a more enterprise-focused dashboard for agencies, brands and others. HootSuite was also the first application in which Twitter began testing its own in-stream ad product.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Moprise is launching a new iPad application it’s calling a “Flipboard for the Enterprise.” The app is a tablet-optimized version of the company’s currently available Coaxion iPhone application. The Flipboard analogy isn’t quite right, however. Flipboard is about reading news and articles, browsing photos and viewing updates from your social networks in a magazine-like format. Coaxion and Flipboard are only similar in that they both have easy-to-browse, touchable, swipe-friendly user interfaces. But Coaxion’s content is corporate documents, not news or tweets. At launch, Coaxion for iPad will connect to both Dropbox and SharePoint services. For the former, you need your username and password to connect, and for the latter, all you need is that, and a SharePoint URL. The I.T. department doesn’t necessarily have to be involved in the setup or configuration, allowing for a bottom-up adoption cycle. Moprise’s platform can connect to SharePoint out of the box, something which two of Moprise’s Co-founders, David D’Souza and Russell Williams, both ex-Microsofties, know a little something about. Documents in Coaxion are dragged down to the iPad from these services, where they can be made available for offline viewing. In addition, the main Coaxion interface has user-generated streams called “Discussions.” Files are dragged-and-dropped into these streams and individual users can be added as contributors. They can then add their own files and share notes within the stream, which the rest of the stream’s subscribers can view.  Future versions of the application will include support for other services, including Google Docs and Salesforce. Box.net support may or may not be available at launch, too. Later updates will include more synchronization features, allowing Coaxion users to tap a “sync” button to automatically synchronize their offline documents with the versions hosted in the cloud. Even further down the road this process will be automated – no button-pushing needed. This would solve one the app’s primary issues at present: documents will quickly become out-of-date  if you don’t keep pulling down the most recent version. This is less of an issue for users on the Enterprise level of service, though. Enterprise customers can use special Moprise software on their internal infrastructure to push changes down to iPad users as needed, but this is a premium feature. Meanwhile, for a limited subset of services and offline documents, the app will be free. The next step up is a $20/month per user plan. Enterprise pricing varies. The iPad app will be available in a few weeks time. Moprise raised $500,000 in angel funding in July. It has 6 full-time employees, based in the Seattle area. The company is not looking to raise additional funding at present, it says. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Austin-based video startup latakoo has a funny name (it’s some kind of lark), but a great idea: make it easier to transfer HD video. Built by a group of journalists and technologists to solve the real-world problem of video-sharing in the newsroom environment, the company has already attracted over 200 paying customers, including many TV station groups. With latakoo’s tool called Flight, videographers can quickly compress and upload large video files in a matter of minutes. Those videos are stored in latakoo’s Web-based cloud application, and can be privately shared with colleagues who can download the file on their end in a smaller, more compressed format. The tool, a software program that runs on your computer, compresses HD video to 1.5 to 5% of the original’s video’s file size, while still maintaining the video’s quality and resolution, the company claims. The compression techniques it uses aren’t new – in fact, they’re open source techniques which have just been better optimized for the startup’s purposes. The outputted video is served up in MPEG4 format with all the audio channels intact, as is often needed for editing purposes. Videos shared through the network are never public, but are only available to those you explicitly share them with. This makes latakoo a good fits for the newsroom environment, or for any other company needing to move large video files around in a more efficient fashion. Videos can be shared outside the network, too, using email. Non-logged in users are emailed a link that directs them to a download page.  Unbelievably, video-sharing in the newsroom is often still done through very old-fashioned methods, as latakoo’s founders knew from first-hand experience. Some of its customers were, prior to adopting the service, sharing video using tape, syncing servers over satellite connections, FTP or file-sharing services like YouSendIt. While the latter will work for sharing large files, the process of uploading an HD video to file-sharing service is painfully slow. Latakoo had a soft launch earlier this summer, using the journalist founders’ connections in the industry to seed the product to a handful of newsrooms for testing purposes. Since then, word has spread virally, through word-of-mouth recommendations. The company’s subsequent customer base actually came to them, instead of the other way around. In addition, because latakoo is not a free service, all of its customers are already paying for the product. There are several payment tiers currently available, mostly monthly rates based on minutes of video delivered. There is one pay-per-minute plan available for the more occasional video hobbyist user. Jon Orlin, who runs TechCrunch TV, was initially a skeptic.  But he did some beta and real world testing and was very impressed.  Orlin says “Latakoo solves a real problem for us.  We recently had some large HD video files shot for our Keen On show in Aspen.  Andrew Keen was able to use the simple compress and upload software to send the files to us for editing.  Without Latakoo, it would have taken at least 6 hours to just upload the files.  We were able to complete the transfer and start editing in less than 30 minutes.  And the quality was perfectly acceptable, even after the heavy file compression.”  Orlin adds there are other ways to transfer large video files, but most involve expensive hardware or software. The company closed its seed round of $1.3 million just prior to this week’s TechCrunch Disrupt conference. The money will be used to grow the company and the product, starting with the rollout of more features and improvements over the next few weeks, including social sharing mechanisms for uploading the compressed videos to YouTube or posting to Facebook and Twitter. Latakoo has an API, too, which will allow in-house developers to build applications on top of the service for things like automating the video downloads. Interested users can sign up to join latakoo’s waiting list here. Update: 3:30 PM EST, Ben Werdmuller von Elgg of Latakoo reached out to inform us that he had given us the wrong number of paying customers before (40). The actual number is now over 200, he says. We’ve updated the post to reflect the change.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily HTML5, HTML5, HTML5 — it seems to be the only thing anyone wants to talk about these days. And that excitement could get kicked into overdrive next week when Facebook unveils Project Spartan, their platform for HTML5 apps. But why wait? A startup that launched at TechCrunch Disrupt has already built an entire HTML5-based OS: Carbyn. The great thing about Carbyn is that there’s nothing to install. Because it’s HTML5, it works in the browser. Well, any “modern” browser, as Google often likes to say — that means essentially anything but the older versions of IE. You simply open a browser and log-in to Carbyn and you’re ready to go. The team showed it to me running on both an iPad and a BlackBerry PlayBook. Soon it will work on smartphones as well, they say. Once you load up the OS, you can pin any app to the main OS screen (again, all in the browser). Apps can be tailored for Carbyn from the ground up (still using all HTML5) or there’s a wrapper that can be used to make existing apps work. There’s a SDK for all of this, and the team says that they can get any app up and running in less than a half hour. So how is this different from something like the Chrome Web Store? Well, that’s just a store for HTML5 apps, it’s not an OS to run them. They still run in the browser itself, and that means when you close one, you’re just closing a window or a tab. When you close a Carbyn app, you’re taken back to the Carbyn homescreen. But the key is that there’s much better multi-tasking thanks to their SDK which allows different apps to talk to one another in a way that traditional web apps can’t.  In many ways, Carbyn is more similar to the browser itself, Chrome. Or even closer, Chrome OS. But the Chrome Web Store only works on Chrome and only on personal computers. Carbyn is meant to run anywhere (again, anywhere with a “modern” browser). “Google wants to promote their own products, we’re agnostic,” co-founder Jaafer Haidar notes. Carbyn is probably a bit closer to Jolicloud, a startup we’ve covered a bunch. But they’re in the process of refocusing their product. And the truth is that they were always a bit different anyway. While the vision may have been similar, Jolicloud perhaps suffered from being a bit too early to the space. When they launched, HTML5 wasn’t on the tip of everyone’s tongue, so they had to build an OS around Linux. As for Facebook with Project Spartan, Carbyn anticipates it will have the same problems as the Chrome Web Store in that it will be too closely tied to the parent company. “Hopefully Facebook doesn’t try to pull a Microsoft and create some proprietary hooks for HTML5,” Haider says. Carbyn is now focused on partnering with some key developers to tailor apps for their platform. They eventually plan to take a cut of app store sales (the standard practice) or possibly do affiliate deals. The Canadian-based startup has 5 employees and has been entirely self-funded up until now. They’re in the process of raising their first outside funding. See Carbyn in action in the video below. Latest headlines delivered to you daily IntercastNetwork is a rich-media interactive platform that allows brands to connect to audiences using a combination of live-streaming video, real-time polling, live chat, Q&A, payment processing and more. The resulting platform works well for live broadcasters, who can track audience engagement levels and feedback during in real-time, and adjust their message accordingly. Unlike LiveStream, Justin.tv or UStream, for example, IntercastNetwork lets broadcasters and publishers push live video feeds, including those from outside sources, directly to their own website’s homepage or others’ sites, where branding, features and other platform components can be more directly controlled. IntercastNetwork grew out of Brand Knew, a full-scale digital agency with offices in Los Angeles and New York. Explains Co-founder Zachary Suchin, he and fellow Co-founder Jason Schutzbank refer to themselves as “a developmental venture equity firm” because, on occasion, they invest development and other services in exchange for equity in the venture. Recently, Brand Knew was approached by a long-time ad veteran about building out a “QVC for the Internet.” But it was Jason who realized that the application for the technology could extend far beyond online shopping. With the platform, publishers can push live video to viewers in a number of ways using the technology, including on Facebook tabs, microsites, mobile, or to homepages, through banners or expandables, for example. Alongside the main video window, real-time polling, chat, and other applications run to further engage the audience. With all these technologies combined, the broadcaster has something closer to a “real” conversation with viewers. They’re talking “with” their viewers, not “at” them.  For obvious reasons, this platform is ideal for politicians who give live speeches online. Candidates can immediately adjust their talking points on the fly based on the feedback they receive from the real-time analytics on the service’s backend. In addition, the platform includes a payment processing mechanism, which politicians can use to solicit campaign funds on the fly. The company has a long list of interested companies, brands, politicians and others. We got a peek at the “in talks with” list here at TechCrunch Disrupt’s Startup Alley, and it definitely included some recognizable names in terms of global brands and well-known politicians. We can publicly confirm that NBC Universal will be using the service. And with election season just around the corner, know this: you’ll see IntercastNetwork in action very soon, somewhere big. IntercastNetwork has received $1.25 million from undisclosed angels.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch Disrupt Startup Alley participant ThingLink is a Helsinki, Finland and U.S.-based startup that lets you add rich media tags to online images. These tags appear as small dots when you hover your cursor over the image, and can link out to a number of services, including Amazon, iTunes, YouTube, EventBrite, Facebook, Twitter, Vimeo, Flickr, SoundCloud, Spotify, Wikipedia and many others. You can also choose to tag the images with just text or standard URLs, too. These enhanced, interactive images can then be hosted online, on a website or blog, for example. Already, the format is proving popular with music labels, several of which are using ThingLink images on artists’ sites.    (Note: above image is for illustrative purposes only, not a  live ThingLink image.) The startup was launched back in June of this year, but was showing off its concept in TechCrunch Disrupt’s Startup Alley this week. When I dropped by the booth, folks from a major movie studio were giving the startup a serious look. It’s not surprising. ThingLink’s sign promotes its high CTR’s (click-through rates) as a key selling point. CMO Neil Vineberg tells me that averages can be anywhere from 1.5% to 20%. In some campaigns, CTR’s were even as high as 50+%. Given that banner ads hover around 0.05% these days, says Vineberg, (or sometimes even worse, we should note), even the low-end of ThingLink’s scale would catch marketers’ eyes. As noted above, ThingLink has already proved popular with content promoters, including several indie record labels, and most recently, music artist promoter TopSpin.  Explained TopSpin CEO Ian Rogers, “photos are a big source of traffic for artists, so it makes sense to attach links to artist offers and let those images travel the web.” (ThingLink has a deal in the works with another big company in music industry, but we can’t get into specifics at this time.) Some the artists on ThingLink also use the image hotspots to allow users play music directly from the photo itself. To play a track, it’s as simple as clicking the dot then clicking the play button that shows up in the small pop-up overlay. The hotspots on ThingLink images can be associated with affiliate accounts, when viable, such as Amazon’s affiliate program, for example. And on the back-end, a real-time analytics engine tracks image and tag-specific views, hovers and clicks, helping promoters evaluate the successfulness of their campaigns. Images are embeddable and shareable (via Facebook, Twitter, email, direct link), and the tag editor is simple to use, too. Music labels aren’t the only companies interested in the technology. ThingLink has a showcase of examples for commerce, fashion, design, education and social connection. And the U.K.-based news outlet The Guardian uses ThingLink, as you can see here. Thinglink has received around 2 million Euros in early-stage funding from European investors Inventure and Lifeline Ventures, as well as TEKES, the Finland Funding Agency for Technology and Innovation. Several former Nokia engineers have also found a new home at the startup, we hear. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Unigo.com, a website that provides information for finding, getting in and paying for college, has raised its first round of institutional funding. The startup has raised $1.6 million in financing, led by The McGraw-Hill Companies. Unigo says it will use the capital to expand to include graduate schools and accredited universities outside the United States, and broaden its reach through alliances with publishers.  The Unigo.com network is powered by college counselors and a community of enrolled college students, acting as an online resource of information to get in and finance college.   Unigo.com hosts more than 200,000 multimedia reviews by students on 6,500 campuses across the country, free of charge. Game mechanics incentivize counselors and students to compete as they contribute more, leading to a 400 percent increase in content over the past year, according to the fledgling company. US News & World Report has recently selected Unigo to provide student reviews for its rankings and directories, including its college rankings. Unigo boasts an impressive advisory board, including people like Fotolog and Sixdegrees.com founder Adam Seifer, TiVo president and CEO Tom Rogers and Bob Chase, former President of the National Education Association. Latest headlines delivered to you daily San Francisco startup SaveUp has raised $2 million in early-stage funding from BlueRun Ventures and True Ventures.  The company has developed a rewards program for personal savings, but has yet to launch its service in public beta (you can sign up for an invite). In a press release, SaveUp says it intends to rewards Americans for saving money and paying down their debts rather than focus on driving consumer spending like traditional rewards programs. The startup aims to incorporate rewards and game experiences into every-day financial activities and partner with major consumer brands. BlueRun’s Jonathan Ebinger joins SaveUp’s board of directors, with True Ventures’ Christiaan Vorkink joining as a board observer. SaveUp was founded by CEO Priya Haji, who also cofounded World of Good (acquired by eBay last year) and CTO Sammy Shreibati, who was previously at PrepMe. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FireHost, a company that specializes in secured cloud hosting, has raised $10 million in Series B funding in a round led by family-owned private equity firm The Stephens Group, with earlier backers also participating.  The additional capital will be used to scale the company and enter the European market (starting with the UK). FireHost, which is based in Dallas, Texas, is a managed hosting provider for websites and applications with critical data protection and performance needs (think ecommerce sites and healthcare IT services).  Customers including Hewlett Packard, Johns Hopkins University, Johnson & Johnson, Duke University, LogLogic, HomeAway and Sotheby’s.  FireHost is also the company that reached out to offer virtual refuge to well-known hacker turned security consultant Kevin Mitnick, after the man proved such a high-profile hacker’s target himself that his former Web hosting partner told him wouldn’t host Web pages for him anymore. Latest headlines delivered to you daily InMobi, which bills itself as the world’s largest independent mobile ad network, has raised a whopping $200 million in funding from Softbank. The investment will come in two tranches: half this month, the other half in April 2012. Softbank joins existing backers Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Sherpalo Ventures as investors in the company, which recently acquired HTML5 ad builder Sprout. Naveen Tewari, founder and CEO of InMobi, commented:  “The size of the investment and quality of investor validate the enormous potential in mobile today and strengthen our role in helping the industry evolve.  We have already established ourselves as a leader in mobile advertising on every continent.  This is just the beginning.  With a global leader like Softbank behind us, we are now well positioned to fully capitalize on the opportunity before us through substantially increased product innovation, deeper market penetration, and acquisitions across the mobile ad value chain.” InMobi says its mobile ad network currently reaches 340 million consumers, in over 165 countries, through more than 47 billion monthly mobile ad impressions.  The company has raised $15.6 million before closing the $200m investment round earlier this week. Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch Disrupt San Francisco has just wrapped. In the feverish air of anticipation we carefully cultivate during the Disrupt season, you may have missed some of the talks, panels, launches, or startups that have taken place here at this incomparable conference. Don’t worry. We’ve collected all the content by our writing and video teams here in this handy omnibus post. If you only share one item today, make it this one. Almost everything that happened on stage was captured by the unblinking eye of TechCrunch TV, so there is video at the bottom of most posts and many even have crowdsourced transcriptions. More video can be found here at the TCTV archive for the event. Literally thousands of photos from our capable photographer can be found here, including most of the companies in the startup alley, and my photos (which appeared in the posts) are free to download from the TechCrunch Flickr page. And of course, all news relating to this and other Disrupt conference can always be found at disrupt.techcrunch.com. Read on for links to the rest of our coverage.   Session one: Disrupting traditional markets Tonara: a tablet-based sheet music program that listens and adjusts as you playFarmigo: community-based growing and selling of fresh local produceHouseFix: tracks home repairs and enriches relationships with home contractors and servicesOpenbucks: cashless and bankless payment using major gift card providersCakeHealth: sophisticated but user-friendly tracking of insurance costs, claims, etc. Session two: Moving the web forward Spool: saves full webpages for mobile consumption later using an intelligent content scraperVerious: a marketplace for mobile app middlewarePressly: HTML5-based, tablet-friendly, quick-deployment web apps for online contentBitcasa: infinite cloud-based storage for all your data with predictive syncing and cachingEverpix: collects all your photos online and offline into a single online meta-album Session three: Entertain us Shaker: a social, network-agnostic mingling environmentYouNow: crowd-rated live web broadcastingAmen: an opinion-rating engine of sorts (simple to grasp, difficult to explain)IdleGames: developing next-generation games for social networksQuest.li: gamifying everyday life (startup alley audience pick)  Session four: Customer-friendly enterprise TalkTo: contacting local businesses for appointments, feedback, etc. via text messageRewardli: lets companies do group purchasing by leveraging the social graphSizeUp: provides rich local metrics for small businesses to help them growTrello: a universal workflow and task management platformPrism Skylabs: processes security footage to produce powerful analytic information on physical spaces Session five: Local networks Postmates: a sort of ad-hoc courier network for excess bike messenger capacityTrippy: friend-sourced travel planning and trip sharingLocalHero: finds people around you who can help with things you need nowGrow the Planet: a sort of real life Farmville that helps you grow your own vegetablesMeexo: gamifies online dating and tries to solve some of the persistent problems in that space Session six: Increasing understanding JiffPad: a platform for facilitating useful communication between doctors and patientsVocre: mobile app that provides near-instant translations of spoken speechPlaySay: a language-learning platform using Facebook that has you translate status updates and commentsGoInstant: simple, instant browser sharing between two or many peopleRentLord: suite of (very useful) tools and rich data tracking for landlords and tenantsCardFlick: rich, clickable “cards” on mobile phones that can be traded by flicking them (startup alley pick)   Our hundreds of applicants were reduced to 29 battlefield companies (plus two selected day-of by the audience) then to the last six, who were given an extended period in which to re-pitch their companies to a new set of judges. After an hour’s retirement and consideration, they returned, with the news that Shaker would be awarded the $50,000 prize and prestigious TechCrunch Disrupt Cup. Prism Sky Labs, the runners up, received a gilded shoe. Congratulations to the winners! We would also like to extend our thanks to everyone who applied, attended, sponsored, or supported Disrupt this year. We look forward to seeing you all again here in San Francisco next year, or earlier, in New York or even Beijing.  On another note, this summary wouldn’t be complete without an acknowledgement of Mike Arrington and his contributions to tech journalism. For years TechCrunch has grown bigger and better under his leadership. I’d like to extend a personal thanks to Mike, but I think the standing ovation prompted by Ron Conway’s closing comments is more eloquent:  Best of luck, Mike.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The TechCrunch Disrupt Startup Battlefield semifinals started off in an unorthodox way, with moderator Paul Carr bringing on TechCrunch co-founder Mike Arrington to join tech celebrity judges Ron Conway, Hadi Partovi, Marissa Mayer, Roelof Botha and Matthew Cohler onstage. While we wait for the final winners to be announced, you can parse through my notes on all of the fun, below. Bitcasa Unlike Dropbox which syncs your file to the cloud, Bitcasa allows you to write to a cloud, using your computer the same way you would normally, but the utility is writing the file to the cloud. Bitcasa intelligently determines what files you would access, and caches them on your hard drive. It’s significant because it gives you infinite storage in the cloud, subverting the typical model of writing files to your hard drive and then having to move them when you store. In beta it’s a free, freemium model, $10 a month for infinite storage. Judges’ feedback:  Mike Arrington tweeted out last night that, “Bitcasa is a game changer unless they screw up.” Referring to the fact that there might be three Dropbox investors onstage, “How will you grow your user base considering Dropbox is out there?” Bitcasa answered that their value proposition is fundamentally different from Dropbox, “We’re about the new hard drive,” not about file sharing, “You still need to have space on your hard drive for Dropbox. Judge Marissa Mayer also expressed concern that Dropbox was a competitor and wondered about the sharing process, “When you’re sharing with a mobile device, are you storing things on the client, or is it purely streamed?” The answer is that the device will stream it from the cloud in realtime, over the network.” Botha brought up the cost factor of streaming all that data, which Bitcasa addressed by saying that they use a caching model, which reduces costs. Matt Cohler wanted to know what was the most important problem the startup solved for consumers, to which the startup responded that they never want you have to pull out another USB stick or hard drive again, whereas with Dropbox you still need the space. Ron Conway brought up the fact that it’s basically going to be a marketing battle between Bitcasa, Dropbox and Boxee and the startup really needs to focus on what differentiates it. “Dual video caught my eye, that seems to be proof you’re different. Beef up the marketing, because this will be mad.” After a Partovi question about security, Cohler brought up that he saw much of this core functionality with GDrive. “Why are you going to be successful?” To that the startup said, “My mother could use this and she’s not a computer person. It’s the Apple model, we just want it to work.” Shaker Shaker is a social environment that allows you to use your Facebook profile to interact with people around you, “like a Second Life, except you’re yourself.” The platform is for social experiences, which allows you to visit virtual places like bars or offices, incorporating the Facebook API in order to include stuff like a Like wall where you can see what you have in common with the other people in the room. Shaker has had almost 10K users since its beta launch. Judges’ feedback: Ron Conway began the feedback by asking how similar the app was to Second Life, and what happens when the app morphs into a dating site. The Shaker founder talked about how it used your real identity and how it was more meaningful than Second Life, “They’re creating meaningful relationships. Yes, if you build a bar, expect to see a dating or a flirting scene,” he said, but referred to the fact that the app wasn’t just about dating. Matt Cohler asked about the app’s peak concurrent user number, and the Shaker founder said that he’s only opened it in Israel without any PR and they had to shut down invites to 540 people. At peak hours the app has 5% to 6% of usership, “Shaker is live and vivid 24/7.” Botha likened the app to Snow Crash, a Neil Stephenson science fiction book that refers to virtual worlds, “It gives you a sense of what is coming. I like it for stuff beyond dating, like listening to music.” “What has surprised you about the usage?,” he then asked. “When we tested different graphic environments, we got completely different interaction,” the Shaker founder said. “Even with the same communities, no one’s dancing on the bar during morning.” “It’s cool to try to change interaction,” Marissa Mayer said. “One concern I have is the number of people. My question is around how you decide to move in the space… If it just is dance mode then it’s just glorified chat.” The Shaker founder said that with regards to movement he considers the figure in shakers more like profile carriers and not avatars, “They carry your profile. You really communicate with the profile.” Hadi Partovi asked whether they’ve ever split up Shaker into two rooms, “How do you decide who goes in which room?” The Shaker founder said that they had actually opened it up for testing in one room, and kept adding rooms, “That’s not the strategy moving forward, we have a system which allows for infinite number of rooms.” “I’m a big fan, I’m an investor,” said TechCrunch founder Michael Arrington “I’m continually surprised by the breadth and depth of startups out of Israel … If I was Marissa I would say we’re buying this today, immediately make it Google + related.” CakeHealth CakeHealth wants to be the Mint of heath, allowing you instant insight, bill reconciliation and personalized recommendations for various healthcare programs. Judges’ Feedback Marissa Mayer: There were a lot of things I really liked, recommendation engine key is a core piece of tech, can double in your insurance. Google health didn’t work out very well because of data restrictions. Insurance data isn’t accurate. An insurance company would say that you had Cancer when you didn’t have Cancer. CakeHealth responded that 80% of bills have errors but they had built-in alerts for errors, “There are common things we can look for by tapping into databases; we started out with insurance claims. As we move up the chain we can see even more detailed information.” (Yes, Mike Arrington did take a pee break) Roelof Botha: This would be great if it lives up to the promise of solving problems, every time I’ve had an issue with a health care company it’s because they’ve made an error. CakeHealth: Machine learning is too strong a word, but we’re creating rules for what can and cannot happen. Hadi Partovi: I can’t imagine taking out a bill, and taking a picture of it with my iPhone. I’d rather just tell my doctor to send it to CakeHealth. CakeHealth: Taking a pic of the bill is temporary. We’re looking at other models that are not quite in place yet. We are still dealing with a very paper-intensive process by taking a picture and then transitioning into those other models as they become viable. We’re looking at the Netflix model, envelope to house. Matt Cohler: Distribution, market? CakeHealth: It’s consumer oriented, employers are great marketers because it will streamline process, reduce amount of inquiries. Ron Conway: How does this monetize? CakeHealth: It’s a Referral model: sign people up for plans and savings accounts. bigger opportunity foundation, action oriented negotiating transaction fee. TalkTo TalkTo allows you to text any local business for information as easily as you text your friends. It looks just like SMS, nothing new you have to learn. If a business is not on TalkTo, it reroutes the request to a call center which calls the business and texts you back your answer. Judges’ Feedback Ron Conway: This reminds me of Yext. How are you communicating with businesses, customers that are texting you to TalkTo? “We’re going through a call center,” the startup said. “If you sign up for the premium plan we’ll keep making the calls.” Marissa Mayer: I like this business a lot, we actually bought one of your competitors Talkbin. I’m worried about non-responsivenes. What kinds of guarantees of responsiveness do you have? Matt Cohler: I would encourage you guys to think about not charging the consumer at all. Roelof Botha: One of the things that I worry about is the consumer expectation around direct messaging. It will take a very long time. Most of the time you’re going to end up with a “can’t get ahold of them response.” Hadi Partovi: You should give an email address to every business. Mike Arrington: I’m worried about the cost getting ahead of this business, but it’s a huge win. I honestly think Marissa should buy this, and Shaker and Bitcasa. It sure would be nice as a consumer. Marissa Mayer: We do think the space is interesting which is why we acquired Talkbin. Prism Sky Labs Prism Sky Labs uses its video intelligence technology to fuse images together into realtime story boards showcasing a space. It aims to change the way businesses deal with and highlight customer flow. Judges’ feedback: Roelof Botha: There’s a lot there. What’s the crisp online hook? Prism Sky Labs: Video is a huge problem for SMBs.  We could probably build a whole business just doing video for businesses,  but we want to get into the social media aspects. We really want people who are out there to see great views of what is going on. Marissa Mayer: Obviously, this is related to what we do. Business owners are very particular about the state of their ship. People want to put their best foot forward. People want the privacy silhouettes to be perfect. Prism Sky Labs: A lot of the things we’re dealing with go away as we accumulate more images. Background, we’re learning what the background of the place looks like over time. We have all that data. We can give businesses merchandising tools.  Hadi Partovi: I want Mike to say Marissa should buy this. Mike Arrington: Marissa should buy this. Ron has created a lot of value out there. He could start a lemonade stand and I’d invest. Hadi Partovi: In terms of trying to solve hard problems technically you’re actually doing that. I would try to figure out which of the 10 things you could do and pick the most exciting one. Ron Conway: The use case for this product is going to morph a lot. This could turn into a huge company. Do you have a unique IP that enhances clarity? Prism Sky Labs: We’re registered 20 inventions,  provisional patents, since July 1st. Farmigo Farmigo is an online local food subscription service that aims to bring people fresher, tastier, healthier, cheaper and more convenient food by connecting consumers directly to farmers. Judges’ feedback: Mike Arrington to Hadi Partovi (who is an investor): “Why do you think company should win? ” Hadi Partovi: The food industry  is 10% of the GDP. It’s a trillion $ industry, not billion, and disrupting it is good for our health. Marissa Mayer: Groceries are a low margin business, but full disclosure: I don’t cook. There’s a lot of overhead managing behavior as a consumer. What happens when you sign up with too many vendors? Farmigo: There shouldn’t be a concern about the activation goals, as we’re exceeding them. Once it’s hit exceed goal in a week, it’s not going to dip back down. Food subscription is a change in the way people buy their food. Roelof Botha:  I’m concerned about adoption from producers. Also it might suffer from a Netflix subscription problem, how people never watch things in their queue. I can’t anticipate if I want peaches next week, what if I want apricots? Farmigo: We’re focusing on UX, so each grower could use it easily. From the producer’s side it’s usually an admin using the system which means they’ll have comp literacy. Ron Conway: Awesome example of a concept I was trying to explain to Mike, Collaborative Consumption. I’m selling my Safeway stock. Trello Trello is simple collaborative software that lives in the cloud. Since it’s launch yesterday, it’s amassed 26K users. Judges’ feedback: Ron Conway: Who do you compete with? Trello: Salesforce, Findbugs, Microsoft Project construction teams. But we’re vastly simplified, our way of doing it is different. Roelof Botha: This would cut away half the email I receive. But what if you’re in a group of 10 and two don’t adopt? How do you draw people in? Trello: The way I use this product: make the board, and update it with what I think he’s working on.  He starts to get value out of looking at what I think he’s working on. Marissa Mayer: I think it’s impressive. I worry that Salesforce is a lot more customizable. What happens when there are 1000 requests? Can it scale? Trello: I probably wouldn’t use this if I had 1000 requests, there is an inventory of feature ideas that I wouldn’t implement. Nobody’s going to use Excel to do their taxes. The vertical applications will be better in some cases, Salesforce for your sales pipeline, Bug Tracker for bug tracking, Hadi Partovi: One of the hardest challenges is explaining to people what it will be used for. How do you say that in one sentence? Trello: Organize everything together. You kind of have to rely on people’s imaginations. Paul Carr: Mike you have the last word. Mike Arrington: Now you’re giving me performance anxiety. I think this pretty good. Latest headlines delivered to you daily This year’s Startup Alley at TechCrunch Disrupt SF was the biggest ever, with 200 companies exhibiting throughout the conference. Perhaps as a result it’s attracted many more international companies and the variety of startups is still pretty amazing to see. We decided to do a lot of running around with a camera (quite literally), and do some quick fire interviews with the startups – the videos are below. As with previous years there were plenty of Israeli startups at TechCrunch Disrupt, but this year they took out an entire “pavilion”, which amounted to a long line of tables. This clustering of companies from one location proved a great idea – perhaps we’ll see more countries follow suit next year. Amongst the startups we chatted to included Mingle, where you can chat with people around a location but where you don’t have to reveal your actual identity. The lack of a map may be a drawback in my opinion, unlike MapChat. Mogime was a social network with customisable avatars. MoreDays was a kind of journaling application combined with a diary app, with a nice interface. Reminicent of Diary.com, although Diary has not emphasised the journal as much. Poll.do was a startup allowing people to poll / survey users, largely via Twitter.  We then ran into Christopher Maire, a serial VC investor in Berlin and had a quick chat about the Berlin tech scene. PhoneDeck, a pretty amazing app which lets you track analytics around you phone use. I’m looking forward to its launch. PigeonMe is an interesting app which is a little like a private check-in on Foursquare for scheduling meet ups with friends or colleagues. You share you future location with someone privately.  Streamer is a startup which brings small business data together in one ‘stream’. BookLikes is a social app for book readers where users follow eachother and make lists of their favourites, a little like on Twitter. Coming out of Poland. ReadMill is a startup based in Berlin which is also socialising books via an iPad app and online. Reviewed here.  RedStaple is a web tool to create ePublications and enhanced iBooks – something which authors and publishers could use. SelectTogether is about social shopping, and getting your friends to chat with you about products as you are online shopping. MinuteBox is a new way to talk to experts. Lumatic is tackling making cities more useable by pedestrians. SkyYou is a new social games app startup. Whit.li is about fixing online reviews and making them more relevant. VisualScript is creating an animation tool for HTML 5. Veat is a SAAS solution for dealers for after-sales marketing campaigns.  Eeve is a location based socal network which allows people to create a temporary network with pictures. It’s like Color – but it works… Dapsem is a thank-you platform – like an upgraded Like for people. TourWrist creates 3D visualisations of locations using an iPad app – great for travellers. ShopCade isa social shopping app, built in Facebook, where you can sell and buy.  Quest.li is ‘Twitter hunting in real life’ – you bet real money on tasks you follow via a mobile app. Monday Part 1 Monday Part 2 Tuesday Part 1 Tuesday Part 2 Tuesday Part 3 Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over the weekend, over 400 hackers gathered for 24 hours of hacking, Red Bull, and networking. From these late night toils, over 130 hacks emerged from the TechCrunch Disrupt Hackathon. On Sunday afternoon, five expert judges, which included Salesforce’s VP of Open Cloud Standards Kevin Marks, Google’s Rohit Khare, Betfair’s Vice President of Mobile Engineering Raj Vemulapalli, OneTrueFan founder Eric Marcoullier and Ask.com’s Director of Engineering, Mobile and Platforms Vishal Shah were tasked with choosing the top six hacks from the plethora of presentations.  The judges chose FlickMunk, Gainify, Weather Checker, ECCube, Ex-Rated, and U4Them, which today had the opportunity to present their fledgling startups and products to the crowd at Disrupt.  For videos of each of the startups on stage, see Alexia’s coverage of the winners here. And for some TC’s staff favorites from the hack-filled weekend of hacks and hackers, check out Biggs’ coverage here. Last but not least, for some hacker style and flavor, check out some sartorial splendor here. Quick bios of the Hackathon winners below: FlickMunk: A “Hipmunk for movies,” FlickMunk’s app looks for local theateres around you, helping you to plan your trip to the movie, see how far you are from the theater and whether not you’ll be able to make it in time — as well as helping you rate and track those movies once you’ve taken a gander. Gainify: Shopify shoppers take note. Gainify is a nifty plugin that lets you turn any Shopify store into a daily deals site. Weather Checker: Google Calendar plugin that allows you to check the weather of a planned event in advance. ECCube: An HTML5 3D color matching game. Ex-Rated: For a novel take on the dating model, Ex-Rated brings Yelp to dating by creating a system that allows users to rate their exes. U4Them: This hack is aimed at those who cannot afford to pay for healthcare. U4Them is a way to connect people who need help with healthcare payments with people who have the ability to donate cash. Every listing is initiated and approved by social services wing of hospitals, and allows users to ask friends and family to accept payments via PayPal.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, last year’s winner, Qwiki, took the stage to give an update on their business. We originally noted that they may be the future of information consumption. But that information was largely pre-packaged at the time. Today, they’ve starting to give people the power to make their own Qwikis. CEO Doug Imbruce announced the Qwiki Editor today. With it, publishers will be able to create their own Qwikis. For example, Imbruce showed off a Qwiki made for this TechCrunch Disrupt. This turns the roughly 3 million reference topics that are on Qwiki now into a possibly limitless experience. Qwiki is going to start testing this WYSIWYG editor with a limited number of partners. (Imbruce notes that they’ve been pinged by hundreds of publishers). But eventually, the plan is to open it up so anyone can make their own Qwikis. The tool offers a simple drag-and-drop experience. Imbruce also announced that Qwiki has a new HTML5-based experience on the web. Previously, the experience on the web was Flash-based only. This gives Qwiki even more potential reach in terms of devices. They’re on the web fully now with iOS and Android as well. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today during TechCrunch Disrupt, Michael Arrington led a discussion between a panel of angel investors. There was a ton of good content, but one thing that sticks out as particularly interesting is the way 500 Startups’ Dave McClure thinks about valuations. He has what he calls “million dollar points” — and there are five of them. McClure brought them up when a question from the audience asked how the investors set valuations for early stage startups. Other panelists had less concrete answers, and Mike himself said worrying about valuation is not something that’s good to hear from an entrepreneur’s mouth. But McClure is practical, and realizes there needs to be a concrete way to think about valuations at any stage. Here are his five key points: 1. Market 2. Product 3. Team 4. Customers 5. Revenue Each of those is worth around a million dollars in McClure’s mind in early stage investing — assuming each of them are nailed, of course. This will undoubtedly be a somewhat controversial way of thinking. Though there’s no question that it’s better than the alternative Mike suggested: “pulling a number out of your ass”. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mertado, the social shopping startup that allows users to find and buy products on Facebook, today launched “Mertado TV”, a new product that will combine lifestyle video content with product selection on the social web. What does that mean? Mertado TV will deliver syndicated content from networks like the Food Network, Fine Living, and Better TV and feature products found in Mertado’s catalog — all via the comfort of Facebook.  According to Mertado Founder and CEO Vijay Chittoor, beta testing of the Mertado TV platform saw shoppers increasing their repeat purchase activity by 250 percent after viewing the integrated video content. As social commerce revenue will grow to $30 billion in revenue by 2015, the CEO said that the integration of the startup’s product catalog with top lifestyle programming should situate them well in a space poised to see hockey stick-type growth.   Attached here you can see a couple examples of Mertado users who interacted with its new TV platform and actually bought something. For privacy, we’ve smudged out the names of the users. It also helps that the startup is today announcing that it has closed a $2.3 million series A round of financing, led by Rustic Canyon Partners, which was joined by current investors Blumberg Capital and Redpoint Ventures.  “Our mission is to expose a selection of high quality, unique, lifestyle-oriented products forthe home to consumers wherever they spend their time,” said Vijay Chittoor, Founder andCEO of Mertado. “Combining our product catalogue with leading lifestyle programming on theleading online community was the logical next step in truly creating a rewarding social shoppingexperience—and the numbers prove that it’s a hit.” Booz & Company estimates that social commerce revenue will reach $30 billion in 2015. To fuelMertado’s expansion with Mertado TV, the company also announced that it has closed a $2.3MSeries A funding round. Rustic Canyon Partners joined previous investors Blumberg Capital andRedpoint Ventures. Bruce Taragin, Managing Director at Blumberg Capital, will be joining the Mertado board of directors as part of the round. An alumni of the YC spring class of 2010, the startup’s series A funding brings total investment to $3.3 million. Mertado TV is currently available on Mertado.com, with availability on further destinations rolling out soon, including a launch on Press Enterprise’s network next month. The launch of Mertado TV follows the startup’s recent endeavor to help developers make more money on their social games, by rolling out a virtual storefront that creators can integrate into their apps.  As Jason wrote in his coverage of Mertado’s virtual storefront, “When a user activates the Mertado storefront, they’ll see a widget overlaid on top of the game they’re playing. The whole shopping process, from selecting an item to checking out with a credit card, is done from this widget, so the user never gets kicked off to another page (which is good news for developers, who want them to stay engaged with their game)”. For more on Mertado TV, visit the site at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily On stage today at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco, Kevin O’Connor, the former Co-founder of DoubleClick and current Founder and CEO of FindTheBest, offered some pointed advice to aspiring entrepreneurs.  Having co-founded DoubleClick, which was acquired by Google in 2007 for over $3 billion, O’Connor said that a lot of people think he has more money — and perhaps more brains — than he really does. He was being modest, of course, but the truth is that DoubleClick sold twice, and the co-founder was not part of DoubleClick’s second, more lucrative sale to Google. Engineers, which O’Connor is by background, do not always make the savviest businessmen, he said, but they sure can be quotable. When TC’s Erick Schonfeld asked O’Connor what advice he would give to aspiring entrepreneurs, he said that the most successful entrepreneurs are not only those who are willing to break the rules and disrupt stagnant, fragmented industries, but also those willing to “throw a turd in the punch bowl”. O’Connor’s odd but memorable metaphor is a great image for the true disruptive quality that real innovation can have. (Especially in non-potable ways.) O’Connor continued on to say that all the great ideas — and the great thinkers — have been delusional to some extent. Or, at least, their ideas seem more than a little far-fetched or crazy, which can be a sign of something poised for innovation — or for a big flop. The key is finding the balance between delusion and foresight.  The FindTheBest Founder said that he remembered first hearing about eBay and saying to one of his friends what a stupid idea an “online flea market” was, that it was something that would never gain traction. His point being that the best ideas can often be the craziest, and sometimes it takes a crazy person to see the clarity in those nutty ideas. Another big problem that entrepreneurs run into with frequency, he said, is the problem of saying “no”. Entrepreneurs are creative, quick on their feet, and run through an idea a minute, he said. When you’re starting a business, there are one thousand and one things that you can do, but, really, at the end of the day, there are only three or four things that fit into the true strategy of one’s business. The challenge is for entrepreneurs to find those priorities and stick to them with one-pointed focus. O’Connor, like Intuit Founder Scott Cook yesterday, encouraged startups to tackle the big problems, and not become so wrapped up in the solution.  As we wrote yesterday in summation of Cook’s advice to startup founders: Be careful of “falling in love with the solution rather than focusing on, or being delighted by, the problem. Often, founders end up finding — after much wasted time and frustration — that it is their original vision of the solution that is flawed. But if founders never lose sight of the problem, how teams attack the solution can remain more flexible, more iterative, and in the end make a product more likely to succeed”. O’Connor said that it was this obsession with the big problem of web users finding it difficult to make significant decisions on the Web that led him to create FindTheBest and develope tech-assisted, human curated decision-making engine.  So find a digital problem that all your friends — geeks and non-geeks alike are having in today’s digital world — and throw a turd in that punch bowl.  That’s right. A turd. Figuratively speaking, of course. Latest headlines delivered to you daily One of the exhibitors at TC Disrupt was BookLikes.com, a Polish start-up dedicated to letting you know which book you should read next – among other things. The site is essentially a bookstore melded with a recommendation engine melded with a social network. It allows you to follow your friends reading lists, prepare reading groups, and see what you should read next based on your reading history and your friends’ reading lists. You can buy books through the platform, thereby registering your reading habits right on the site. They’ve been in public beta since June and it looks like they’re getting a bit of traction. BookLikes is dedicated to all kinds of readers; it’s easy for anyone to find a good book thanks to the site’s highly sensitive algorithm. Unlike other sites, BookLikes considers factors such as reading preferences, general book information and social activity when providing a personal recommendation. Moreover, the algorithm is constantly learning from users’ behavior, allowing the site to give suggestions consistently tailored to people’s reading habits. The problem with book sites like this one and, to an extent, services like BookCountry, is that reading and writing is quite solitary. Although you and your buds may have similar reading habits, it’s really hard to visit a website after you read a book simply because you’re no longer thinking about the book. Ereaders are obviously a way around this, but B&N already has their own recommendation engine as does Amazon. I could see this as useful for folks who will buy their books specifically from BookLikes but, again, it’s tough to drag the finger from the margin to the screen. In the end, however, these things seem like they could feasibly work. Will they work on the long term? Probably not, but it’s worth a try. In they end, they can probably sell the recommendation engine once the big guys begin to lap them in the marketplace. Until then, it’s interesting to see how what books are best for you and yours. The service is in English now and will soon be available in Chinese, German, French, Spanish, Japanese and Polish. Best of all? My favorite author is on there!  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Votizen, a new platform for connecting registered voters with elected officials, is launching the first-ever “virtual” precinct walk today, starting with San Franciscans for Jobs and Good Government, a committee supporting Ed Lee for Mayor of San Francisco. This virtual precinct walk is a modern update on traditional door-to-door campaigning, where previously, a politician’s supporters would walk through neighborhoods, knock on doors and encourage their fellow citizens to go out and vote. With Votizen, this process has finally been brought into the 21st century. It allows online volunteers to use social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter to send out personalized messages to their friends. These messages ask friends to commit to voting in an upcoming election.  The promise of Votizen is one of using social media properties, and their vast databases of millions of users, to revolutionize grassroots campaigning. The revolution comes by not only by taking the campaigning online, but by leveraging the social connections between friends in the process. It also connects user accounts to voting databases in order to track whether those who promise to vote actually follow through. “The connection of the databases is the technological feature that wasn’t available before,” explains Ron Conway, Votizen investor and founder of San Franciscans for Jobs and Good Government. The critical mass of users – 400 million on Twitter and 750 million on Facebook, is nothing to sniff at, either. In addition, LinkedIn support is on the way and for technological laggards, a system for email authentication (often involving a follow up phone call), is available. The registration system may be a bit more cumbersome than other online sites, and that can hurt conversions to some extent, admits David Binetti, Votizen Co-Founder and CEO, but the end result is a database of authenticated, registered voters. Once a registered voter is confirmed on the service, they can then volunteer to be a “precinct captain.” In this role, the voter uses the service’s built-in social networking tools to reach out to their Facebook or Twitter friends, asking them to respond to a simple question: will you pledge to vote for (insert politician’s name here)? Friends can respond “yes” or “no.” And in this initial first run with the new technology, the candidate in question is San Francisco’s Ed Lee. When friends respond “yes” to a voting pledge request, Votizen then tracks whether or not that vote has actually occurred. The system encourages its users to vote by absentee ballot, so it can scrape records from the voter database, and then thank those who did, indeed, follow through on their commitment to vote. Those who did not are pinged again as a reminder. Beyond facilitating these social grassroots campaigns, Votizen users can also update their voter records, learn about the candidates and the issues and take a stand on those issues, writing letters to their representatives. By year-end, the platform will be up-and-running for local, state and national campaigns, including the presidential elections. Votizen, which received $1.5 million in funding back in December, has several big name supporters in the tech industry, both as investors and advocates alike. Not surprisingly, Randi Zuckerberg, former marketing director at Facebook, focuses on its use of social networking services. “Votizen has developed an important way to reach voters who may not respond to the same tactics that campaigns used until now,” she says. “The virtual precinct walk has the potential to turn conventional campaigning on its head and inspire more people to vote.” Twitter Co-Founder and Obvious C0-Founder Biz Stone is also a supporter, noting that “people bring about change with a little help from technology, and this is a shining example.” Meanwhile, Conway puts it most simply: “Votizen’s platform ensures we are reaching the right people: the registered voters who will decide the election.” “It’s going to allow people to do virtually what they used to do manually,” he says. “It replaces the phone and the feet.” But will a campaigning mechanism of this nature disenfranchise those citizens who don’t have the same access to the Internet as others? Not for long. A later release will support a similar sort of campaigning, but uses SMS messages instead – a technology present even in the most basic phones. Launching in the tech hub that is San Francisco should get Votizen off to a good start. Amid talk of bubbles and the lack of big ideas, Votizen stands out as a startup trying to impact a real change. Says Binetti,”let’s make a statement: Silicon Valley can help improve the political process.” Those interested in joining Votizen can sign up to do so here. Below, an infographic depicting old political campaigning vs. the new.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Foodie favorite Gojee, which curates recipes from food bloggers around the web in a visually beautiful way, has raised $1.2 million in seed funding led by Kapor Capital. As part of the round, President and Co-Founder of Ustream Brad Hunstable is joining Gojee as an advisor.   As we wrote in our earlier review of the site, Gojee lets you search for recipes by ingredient, either via ‘cravings’ or by one ingredient you have in your pantry. You can also input your dislikes or allergies and Gojee will make sure to surface recipes without these ingredients.  So say I had leftover chickpeas in my pantry, I can enter that query and Gojee will show me all the recipes that include that ingredient from the many food blogs it curates data from. The site presents a beautiful image of the food along with a list of what else is included in the dish, a short description of the dish, and a link to the full recipe on the food blog. You can also star the recipe to save it to your favorites. What makes Gojee unique is the visually stunning photography that accompanies each recipe. You actually want to eat the food that you could make via the recipe. Currently the site has under 50,000 recipes, but is focused on adding quality recipes vs. quantity. I’ve actually tested a recipe on the site and it was delicious. And the site has even received attention from celebrity chef Marcus Samuelsson. So it’s no surprise that in the first few months of operation, Gojee has doubled its food writer contributors from 80 to 160. Gojee now has members in 199 countries around the world and has 25,000 members registered through it Google Chrome Web App. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A few weeks ago, we wrote about Life Is Crime, a new location-based mobile game. The premise is pretty awesome: it’s like Foursquare meets Grand Theft Auto. You go around (virtually) beating up friends for money. As it happens, the game has helped parent company Red Robot Labs score some loot of their own — an $8.5 million Series A. Benchmark Capital is leading the round with current investors Shasta Ventures, Rick Thompson (co-founder of Playdom), and Chamath Palihapitiya (former Facebook exec) participating as well. Benchmark’s Mitch Lasky will be joining the board as a result. Red Robot Labs launched Life Is Crime at Penny Arcade Expo (PAX) in Seattle and they note that the convention center where the show was held saw some 20,000 virtual crimes committed in the game during that weekend alone. That resulted in thousands of hurt criminals, millions in contraband trafficked, and tens of millions of dollars robbed or laundered. They tout these things in their press release, which is awesome. Clearly the game caught on quickly with its core demographic. And all of that is just on Android. The iPhone version isn’t ready quite yet but should be out soon. And I can’t wait for that, so I too can get out there and kick some virtual ass. The funding won’t go just towards this one game though, Red Robot Labs is also building out a whole location-based gaming platform. They hope to have three games done by the end of the year — and one of those will be built by a third-party. You can find the Android version of Life Is Crime here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily One of the challenges for Indie movies is getting exposure to consumers. Studio films have massive marketing budgets, and are able to use these channels to get traffic. But movies created by independent producers don’t have a set way to gain buzz. Enter Prescreen, a new startup launching today to give filmmakers and distributors an alternative to traditional advertising and distribution channels.  Basically, Prescreen offers users the ability to subscribe to a daily email alert, which will inform them of one Indie film per day. The user can then visit Prescreen to view trailers for  free and if interested, can rent movies to stream on demand for up to 60 days. Isers can also earn rewards and discounts for sharing movie information on their social networks. Prescreen also gives filmmakers and distributors demographics and other data for the audience that has viewed their films.  At launch, Prescreen which was founded by Shawn Bercuson, will be debuting Kino Lorber’s “The Robber;” a story of a champion marathoner who leads a double life as a serial bank robber, sprinting between fixes (and away from police cavalcades) as many as three times a day.  Bercuson says that while distribution platforms like Netflix and Hulu now include indie films, the discovery mechanism for actually finding and advertising these films isn’t great. By using the email per day channel, Prescreen can get more eyeballs, says Bercuson. Of course, this depends on Prescreen getting a large email userbase. But Bercuson is confident that the site is disruptive enough to gain a loyal (and large following). Latest headlines delivered to you daily IAC-owned Match.com this morning announced that it has acquired a 20% interest in Zhenai, a provider of “online matchmaking services” in China, for an undisclosed sum.  Launched in 2005 by CEO Dr. Song Li, Zhenai provides integrated Internet and telephone matchmaking services to Chinese singles looking for long-term relationships. Zhenai is said to boast a user base of over 30 million registered members.  According to the press release announcing the investment, Zhenai commands “especially high” subscription rates due to subscribers’ access to over 1,000 professional matchmakers at Zhenai’s call centers, who provide subscribers with advice and consultation throughout the dating process. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier today at TechCrunch Disrupt, Instagram co-founder and CEO Kevin Systrom was on a panel with Eric Ries and Scott Cook talking about Ries’ “Lean Startup” concept. In many ways, Instagram can now be viewed as perhaps the poster child of running lean — they have just six employees and they’re just shy of 10 million users. But it’s about more than just having a small workforce, Systrom says. It’s about staying nimble as you grow. In the video above, we talk about that and a bit more about Instagram. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You know what’s not that fun? Apartment searches. Also landlords. Luckily, launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt is Rentlord, a social platform that allows landlords and lessees to painlessly create and manage their rent, leases, contracts, and much more. Rentlord boasts a socially-connected market that lets users find homes and apartments based on a trust gradient enabled by integration with your social graph. Rentlord allows users to find a home or tenant, then start a contract online, as well as connecting members of the home with one another and allowing landlords to manage the property in tandem with their tenant(s). How does it work? Once users sign up for Rentlord, they can list their apartment or house once, including images, details, a description, at which point Rentlord automatically geotags the listing, blasts it out over social channels, and cross-posts across UK rental portals — free of charge. Users can send messages to each other to meet in person, close deals in minutes, using Rentlord’s customizable contracting utility — all from the comfort of a single platform.   The startup has been working with lawyers in Europe to draw up a contract form so that landlords and lessees can do everything online, keep track of their leases, and complete every part of the renting process on one platform. Those contracts are stored on Rentlord permanently, so you can always refer back to the contract, and never have to worry about devious landlords switching up the terms of the lease. As part of creating an all-in-one portal for renters and landlords, Rentlord also offers users the ability to pay their rent through the platform, split bills with housemates, and receive reminders when its time to pay the rent or pay utilities. And for those on the apartment or house search, the startup’s platform enables you to locate restaurants and points of interest that are close to the location of the place you’re interested in to help you decide if its the right neighborhood for you. And for those already renting, the platform enables you to call in a local plumber, report a leak to your landlord, and organize your domestic life. As to how they’re making money, for all those transactions taking place on Rentlord, the platform takes a commission on those transactions, though Founder Colin Tan tells me that the commission is low enough that users won’t be scared away. Rentlord is currently available in the U.K., but it will be rolling out functionality in the U.S. over the next month. The startup also announced today that it is backed by Seedcamp (and was a finalist), the european micro seed fund for internet technology companies based in London, as well as Dave McClure’s 500 Startups. For more on Rentlord, check ’em out at home here. Cool startup.  Presentation:FacebookLinkedInRentlord Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with RentlordLatest headlines delivered to you daily If we’ve said it once, we’ve said it one thousand times. Online dating has grown into big business, but it’s still pretty creepy. There are a lot of startups out there trying to do it better, trying to innovate and iterate, but given the very nature of the beast, it’s a tough obstacle to tackle. Meexo, a startup launching this afternoon at TechCrunch Disrupt is trying to offer a new spin on the dating model by becoming a truly mobile dating site. So what’s it like interacting with this mobile-centric dating app? Meexo is like Pandora for dating, as you interact with the application, it learns about you, and becomes more relevant as you go. If you use Foursquare and Facebook, Meexo pulls in that data to learn more about who you are and what you like.  Yet, as many dating site veterans know, dating platforms can be creepy — and sometimes even dangerous, so Meexo wants to help you manage your privacy. It does this by allowing users to send text messages using the app without actually revealing your phone number. Right, because there’s nothing less creepy than a “private number”. Meexo does also help the creep factor by only allowing one profile per smartphone, so you can’t go crazy creating those fake, stalker profiles. A great feature, though, considering the alternative, is that Meexo enables users to block direct connections on social networks, so that none of your friends can see your Meexo profile. The founders said that, in doing their due diligence, they found that many people refuse to join dating sites for fear of exposing dating profiles to people they already know. Thus, Meexo’s solution for this is the reverse social graph, which means that none of your direct connections on social networks can see your Meexo profile. You know you’re in a safe environment, transforming Meexo into an app that truly connects you with people you actually don’t know, not more people you do.  What’s more, users have access to calendars, to which they can add events and plan dates; if you’re running late for a meetup, for example, you can message right from the app. Meexo is also looking to become your personal concierge (or assistant), remembering that both you and your girlfriend love sushi, and her birthday happens to be coming up, so the app will alert you and help you set up a date at a great sushi restaurant. (A partnerships with OpenTable, for instance, would be a huge leg up here.) Lastly, Meexo is distinguishing itself from the pack by game-ifying dating. When a user joins Meexo, they receive virtual currency, which users pay out when they message other people, forcing daters to be more discerning in their selections. Obviously, in this way, Meexo is attempting to avoid the spamming that has become so endemic to dating sites. Meexo will be available on the app store soon, and the earlier you sign up, the more virtual currency you get, so check it out. The future of the online industry is mobile, but as it stands, most mobile dating feels like an extension of desktop websites plus location. As this is the case, Meexo is offering a bunch of cool features to set itself apart, though game-ifying dating does seem like it has the potential to be a bit creepy. Will be interesting to see how the startup moves forward from here. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInMeexo Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with MeexoLatest headlines delivered to you daily What’s better: an employer giving you $500 or an employer giving you an iPad? At first, you may think it’s better to get the cash. But often, that money is used on things such as paying bills — important, but not lasting. The iPad will last. Every time that person uses it, they’ll remember who gave it to them. “Employees value the non-cash rewards three times over the cash value,” BetterWorks co-founder and CEO Paige Craig notes. But doing perks can be tricky for a small company to manage. It’s often easier simply to hand out cash. That’s where BetterWorks comes in. The service, which has been in testing in the Los Angeles area for several months, in now launching in the San Francisco Bay Area to coincide with TechCrunch Disrupt. BetterWorks focuses on working with companies with anywhere from 2 to 1,500 employees. In other words, small businesses. And what better place to offer this than the Bay Area, startup haven. BetterWorks gives small companies an easy way to reward and incentivize employees. They give these small businesses access to corporate rates on things like gyms and salons, which those businesses can then offer to their employees as perks. Gym memberships and the like are standard for large companies like Google, but startups don’t have the time or resources to deal with such things. And such things can be great incentives and key for startups trying to hire. That’s why companies like Chegg, Dailybooth, Formspring, Get Satisfaction, Klout, Plancast, Twilio, and others have already signed up. They also work with larger companies like Hulu and ICM. This system also benefits vendors because it brings them customers. And assuming the startups stay in the program, it will be a steady stream of new customers. If you’ve heard of BetterWorks, it may have been because it was also co-founded by a co-creator of Farmville, Sizhao Yang. Yes, that Farmville. Why is he doing a employee perk startup? Because there will also be gaming elements to it. While BetterWorks hasn’t yet moved into the intangible world, eventually there will be ways for employers to encourage certain types of behavior (such as getting work done in a timely manner, responding to email, etc) with perks. The gamification of working. But that’s down the road. First, BetterWorks is focused on their core mission of giving small businesses access to big business perks for employees. At first they’ll be in closed beta testing here in the Bay Area, and then they’ll more broadly open up. Then the next step is rolling out to 20 other key U.S. markets, Craig says. The Santa Monica-based company raised an $8 million Series A earlier this year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The number of vegetable gardens is skyrocketing, and organic food and healthy eating are also on the rise. There are more than 70 million gardens in the U.S., which is generating a potential multibillion dollar market. A new startup launching at TechCrunch Disrupt today, called Grow the Planet is hoping to take advantage of this opportunity by making a Farmville for the real world. Grow The Planet wants to be a social network for hobby farmers –- and a resource that can teach anyone to grow their own vegetables and herbs.  The startup’s site aggregates information on plants and vegetables, offers growing skills and techniques, hints and tips for needed activities to become a personal farming resource. Through the site’s social functionality, users can share opinions or growing advice, connecting to each other and even exchanging produce. Grow The Planet is also location-enabled, allowing users to view a map to see what users are close, what they’re growing, and pops down (instead of pins) tomatoes and other veggies so you can see what produce is available around you. And, hey, even offer a neighbor a snack of cucumbers. However, the core of the platform lies in the possiblity for each user to design their own vegetable garden, on their balcony or indoors, and receive tips on what is needed to grow vegetables according to the season, climate zone, weather, etc. The startup brings in extensive research on growth statistics and the integration with climate data and user input to add breadth to the platform.  While the startup offers peer-to-peer functionality, users can also keep their own garden journal to keep track of their progress on their way to veggie victory, schedule and keep track of activities, to-do’s and the overall state of their garden (and of course share that progress with the internal community as well as over other social networks).  So many people would love to be able to grow their own garden, but don’t know where to start. Foodies are are already rabid about their farming, and there really seems to be a lot of potential here to foster a passionate user base. Am I right green thumbs?  Because of national laws, people can’t sell their own crops, but through this sort of exchange network, Grow The Planet has found a really smart workaround. As to how the startup will make money? The founders said that, in the long run, they want to become an online gardening store; but for now, Grow The Planet is offering premium memberships that offer a fuller array of recommendations, tools, the ability to integrate with hardware censors, and extended knowledge and support. Grow The Planet is really hitting on an incredible idea here, and it’s so nice to see a startup that’s not simply trying to be the “Airbnb of — some other space”. It’s creative, and we won’t be surprised if these guys are attracting the attention of investors.  Presentation:FacebookLinkedInGrow the Planet Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with FarmigoLatest headlines delivered to you daily With the proliferation of social networks today, we are by no means at a loss when it comes to connecting with our friends, colleagues, and acquaintances. However, in today’s highly networked world, we’re finding that there’s a lot of noise; it has become increasingly difficult to share stories, images, and links (or ask questions and seek assistance) from a targeted group of people. Those that can really help. A startup launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt, called LocalHero, has developed a mobile networking app that aims to help you make these targeted connections (and turn your friends into heroes). But what does this mean IRL? Let’s say you’ve just joined a local softball league and you’re looking for a new mitt, but you don’t know what brand to buy or where you should go to shop. It just so happens that some of your friends are avid softballers, and you know that they would be the perfect group to ask for advice. LocalHero wants to be an easy way for you to connect with those people so that they can either lend you their mitt, or help you find the right place to go to buy one.  How does LocalHero facilitate this? No, not by magic. The startup pulls information from your go-to social networks, like Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Google+, mixes that with location-enabled functionality, to create a data profile of your friends that are nearby and have the right skills (or interests) that would be relevant to your search. While social networking apps have connected us in unthinkable ways, and we’re sharing our friends, our photos, and our location, there still aren’t many options for people looking to tap a specific group of friends without broadcasting to the entire network or creating specialized lists. LocalHero Co-founder and CEO Ana Baltodano said that she and her team want to create a smart way for friends to take action to become saviors to their friends in need.   The co-founder said that LocalHero was created to be useful in a range of requests, from finding friends interested in joining a shared activity, to utilizing the knowledge of particular acquaintances to solve a problem, to more personal requests that you don’t want to share with strangers. In this sense, LocalHero is a bit Zaarly, a bit Katango, and a bit Yahoo Answers. Or a smart Craigslist for friends, if you will. For LocalHero’s mobile app, users post requests for goods or requests, which users view in a stream that includes both general LocalHero users as well as one’s friends. Users can add photos and enrich the question, or request, with tags, and the app automatically notifies these people of your request — you can then scroll through the tags your friends and users have.  From the tech side, the LocalHero team wanted to bring in the social graph and interest graph, and cross reference those against each other, pulling from a possible set of thousands of users to provide the user with just a few possible heroes (the “thousands” of users come from the entire LocalHero network, which currently stands at about 15,000).  In terms of monetization, LocalHero is still considering different monetization strategies, with the leading contender being targeted local advertising both on the web and mobile app. The smart backend tech makes it easy to find local experts, but the startup also envisions commercial applications as well, and, specifically, LocalHero is in talks with both potential automotive and travel sites. For more, check out the video below: Presentation:FacebookLinkedInLocalHero Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with LocalHeroLatest headlines delivered to you daily There are hundreds of travel sites out there that will help you plan your trip, but often these guides come in the form of game-ified networks or consist mainly of questionable crowdsourced content from local experts — in other words, strangers. More often than not, these people are incentivized to write reviews, making the information questionable at best. Granted, there are some cool startups, like Triposo and Gogobot out there, but sites and apps like the former are taking an algorithmic approach to travel recommendations — no real people in sight. Trippy, a startup launching at TechCrunch Disrupt today, is of the mindset that recommendations are always better when they come from people you trust and that know you well — your friends. Thus, iterating on the age old crowdsourcing model, Trippy is designed to be a so-called “friendsourced” travel solution, tying your social networks, like Facebook, into its platform to let you find out which of your friends have been to the destinations you’re considering — whether it be that they’ve checked-in, lived, worked, or studied there. (Much like Spotify’s model for music.)  Trippy believes that tapping into the travel experiences of your friend (people you implicitly trust) is far more valuable than receiving advice from strangers. Hard to disagree with them there, unless that stranger happens to be a wizard.  Through one-click recommendations and Facebook-style commenting, Trippy lets your friends literally and figuratively chime in to tell you what hotels, restaurants, and destinations would be right for you. The startup offers an easy autocomplete tool to quickly pull up what you’re looking for — from a complete database of locations. Users can then add places they’re considering so that friends can comment on the itinerary, offering feedback in Facebook-style comment feeds.  This hits on one of Trippy’s coolest features: The startup allows users to take advantage of a “friendsourced” itinerary made for the trip they’re planning in realtime, by picking suggestions for destinations you’ll like the most (based on those social recommendations). Trippy then automatically converts those recommendations into an itinerary and plots the trip on the user’s travel map.  When the Tripper is ready to check rates or book the trip, they can do that right from Trippy’s platform. And this is how Trippy plans to make money, by taking a share of the revenues earned by hotels and third-party services when the user makes a purchase. The startup’s mobile app allows users to follow along through seeing your pictures in realtime as you roll through the recommendations they provided on your itinerary. The interface is clean and smooth, and if your friends are the traveling kind, Trippy may very well have some legs.  Presentation:FacebookLinkedInTrippy Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with TrippyLatest headlines delivered to you daily September 12 - 14, 2011						 |The Concourse at San Francisco Design Center, San Francisco, CA			  Couriers have been around forever. You’ve probably seen them on bikes, with messenger bags in tow. For a world teeming with innovative technologies, it seems somewhat surprising that the courier industry remains lacking in disruption. Especially if you consider that the courier industry in the U.S. represents a multi-billion dollar market.  At the top of the food chain, there are the bigs like FedEx and UPS operating under some semblance of technological advancement, but then there are the thousands of smaller businesses lugging around antique devices, dispatching via two-way radios, text messaging, and voice calls. Receiving targeted pick-up and delivery times (that are then lived up to) is practically hopeless — it’s almost worse than planning a house call with the cable company.  Today, at TechCrunch Disrupt, a new startup is launching that is aiming to bring some disruption to the courier space once and for all. Postmates is hoping to transform this niche industry in the same way that Uber is disrupting elite limo services and medallion taxicabs with an on demand delivery service that connects local couriers and bike messengers to anyone who needs to ship anything — from birthday cards to grand pianos. Not only does the startup intend to disrupt how people send packages to each other in the same city, Postmates Founder Bastian Lehmann (who readers may know from his last startup, Curated.by) said that the service will also offer a same-day shipping API for brick-and-mortar retailers. For less than $20, any retailer will be able to offer local customers the ability to order goods online — and have them delivered the same day. (Lehmann said on stage today that the startup has already facilitated 300+ deliveries.)  Thus, Postmates is looking to offer couriers and bike messengers the opportunity to take advantage of technology only available to the behemoths like FedEx and UPS via their mobile device. As to how it works? From Postmates’ mobile app, one can enter both a starting and a destination address, at which point the app will tell consumers how much it will cost to ship their wares, along with couriers that are currently available in the area (all via an interactive map). Users can then choose item details, entering a description of what’s being shipped, attach a photo, etc. in an effort to help the courier know what’s being shipped — then enter the recipient’s name and contact number, and submit.  The app then pings available couriers that are close to the user’s location and notifies them once the courier accepts the delivery, and then updates the user throughout the delivery process, even sending an email with a tracking link to the recipient. This model has, in the big picture, been tried before with mixed success. But it’s nice to see a startup attempting to disrupt a fragmented, real-world business and bring it online. And the app in action features a smooth UI and looks great; however, the startup will have to face the problem of ensuring (and perhaps insuring) users against the risk of stolen merchandise and other risks (especially considering the barrier for entry into the space is so low).  In a way, Postmates is like Kosmo 2.0 for the mobile world, but Kosmo was also notorious for having couriers that trafficked in illicit substances. Posmates, in comparison, has a lot going on and the idea definitely has legs. It also helps that the startup has raised $875,000 from Naval Ravikant, Jeff Clavier, Matrix Partners, Russel Simmons (of Yelp), David Wu, Thomas Korte (of Google and AngelPad), and Russell Cook, among others. The value proposition of Postmates is clearly that it aims to unlock a huge market of local commerce within a city, and the team hopes that we can imagine a day when hundreds of local brick-and-mortar businesses in a way that only flower shops have seemingly managed to do today. The service will first be available in San Francisco (with more cities to come) and the founders said on stage today that they’ve already signed up 50+ retail stores in San Fran, bringing the app both to businesses and individuals as well. Pretty cool. We’re looking forward to seeing where it goes from here. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInPostmates Startup Battlefield PresentationLatest headlines delivered to you daily When you’re just a wee babe, the idea of a new toy is the most exciting thing ever. Then you grow up, and “toys” become ridiculously expensive. You want a Chevy Corvette C6 Z06? That’ll be $70,000, please. You’re interested in picking up a 2011 Roehr 1250sc motorcycle? $40,000.  Though I’m sure plenty of our utterly successful readers have no problem throwing out cash like that, the vast majority of us just can’t cough it up. That’s where Qraft comes in — think of it as the Airbnb for grown-up toys. You can spend a day with that Z06 for $950. And the 2011 Roehr 1250sc? $600/day.  Past motorcycles and cars, Qraft also offers up a way for people to rent boats, helicopters, planes, RVs and other random gear (like a super expensive camping backpack) from their peers. So if you have a super cool boat that isn’t getting much use, or your RV will be sitting in the garage all season, you can just post it up on Qraft and make a little cash.  Qraft lets you rent by day, week, and month, and each user chooses their own price. Search begins by establishing location, but it looks like Qraft hasn’t quite expanded to all corners of the States. New York isn’t supported, for example, while San Fran is. The service is free to join.  The service offers insurance on the items you rent so if someone decides to roll your car into a ditch, it won’t cost you very much. Qraft also offers a feedback system for renters and owners and they also have a system for confirming driver’s license information through scans. They’re trying to avoid the tough lessons learned by Airbnb in its own debacle. Obviously these guys aren’t dealing with real estate so there’s little chance of meth-making in the bathtub but I would be totally pissed if someone flipped my Tesla (assuming I had a Tesla.) Latest headlines delivered to you daily September 12 - 14, 2011						 |The Concourse at San Francisco Design Center, San Francisco, CA			  Well-known software developer Joel Spolsky has built popular Q&A network Stack Exchange, and launched FogBugz, a project management system for software teams. Next up on the docket is Trello, a team workflow platform and list manager that is launching at TechCrunch Disrupt.  Spolsky says that the hardest things about running and managing a company is tracking what people are working on. He created Trello to mitigate this challenge. Trello is the team work system that anyone, in any industry, can use.  The web-based application is designed to be the centralized place where all collaborative team work can be assigned an tracked. The startup says that other project management systems are developer focused, too complex and don’t appeal to a broader community. Trello has been built for any type of workflow, from being a business-focused tool to even acting as personal list-management application.  Trello centralizes around one “board”, where users in a group can create to-do lists, create and assign tasks to co-workers who can then update when a task is complete. For each project you can create a card, which includes communications, activity, attachments, updates and more. You can drag and drop members into these cards, and then drag cards into lists.  Like other workflow applications, the platform is visual. And the app works in realtime, updating on any browser without a refresh, making communication efficient.  Trello also has features for businesses built right in such as permissions and organizations. And for now, Trello will be completely free for users. Trello comes in an iOS app, and a web app.   Q&AJudges: John Ham (Ustream), Hilary Mason (Bit.ly), Kevin Rose (Milk), George Zachary (Charles River Ventures) KR: I love this as a project management software. It looks great. You could charge a few bucks per seat. A: It is free, but when we have huge numbers of people using this a freemium model may make sense. GZ: This an awesome product demo. I am an investor in Yammer, I like what you are taping into. Where do you go for revenue? A: We have all ideas, similar to what kevin is suggesting. Our first goal is to get it as ubiquitous with as little friction. HM: It looks like this is taking better parts of agile programmer technology. A: This is the big picture for what people are working on. HM: IS there an API? What is this built on? A: There will be an API soon. It’s built on Mongo, backbone. JH: There’s an opportunity to nail it. Where are you going to drive adoption? Silicon Valley? VCs? A: I’m not sure. Our goal is to make it a horizontal app. We have a chance to shout about the fact that this is a horizontal category.  Presentation:FacebookLinkedInTrello Startup Battlefield PresentationLatest headlines delivered to you daily When it comes to business intelligence and competitive analysis, large businesses hire consultants and employ in-house analysts to help determine where a business should be operating, how to compete, how to grow and more. But what about small businesses? According to the SBA, 99.9% of the businesses in the US are small businesses. There’s a huge underserved market around SMBs and providing the same business intelligence to this sector could help many businesses actually grow. TechCrunch Disrupt startup SizeUp enables business owners to evaluate their competitiveness and make decisions that will help them increase revenue and save money. SizeUp provides many of the same demographic, industry, geographic, business, and cost data that big businesses use to make smarter decisions, but provides it to all companies at no cost to the end-user. And the company uses a Mint-like data analysis amongst platform users so businesses can see how the stack up against similar companies and competition.  First, SizeUp allows businesses to compare their business, in terms of revenue, employees, growth, salary, profit and more, against the rest of their competition in a region. SizeUp, which says it ‘supercrunches’ millions of data points from both public and private source, enables businesses to perform a side-by-side, apples-to-apples competitiveness comparison of their business to all other competitors in their industry from the local to national level. Second, SizeUp can show businesses where competitors, customers, and suppliers are located on a map, and creates a geo-visual list of potential buyers and vendors. This gives businesses insight how how to serve existing customers, find new ones and pick suppliers. Plus, businesses can see areas with potential customers but little competition.  Businesses can also use SizeUp to find the best places to advertise. SizeUp will actually show business owners the best areas to target their next advertising campaigns. Users can choose from pre-set reports to find areas with the highest industry revenue, mostunderserved markets, and where average business revenue is highest. And businesses can use custom demographic and business filters.  SizeUp is free for now, but will look to monetize money through lead generation, service partnerships, a freemium model, advertising, and licensing.  Data analysis is playing a huge role in large companies day-to-day internal operations, so why should small businesses not be able to access similar services. In the same way that Mint is empowering consumers with financial data, SizeUp is giving business owners a new opportunity to gain competitive insight into how a business can make more money, outperform their competition, and find the best places for success.  Q&AJudges: John Ham (Ustream), Hilary Mason (Bit.ly), Kevin Rose (Milk), George Zachary (Charles River Ventures) JH: What business model will you focus on first? A: As we have had conversations with businesses, we realized that there is a bigger market especially in licensing. HM: Where does your data come from? A: We get data from IRS records, annual reports, courthouse filings, agencies and more. We are updating this frequently.  HM: Do you have a mechanism to help businesses who aren’t that savvy about how to identify competitors, etc.? A: We have a Q&A and how-to to explain how this works for businesses. KR: How do you figure out what is relevant for a specific business? A: We need to know what business they are in and where they are located. It’s very local.  GZ: What does the product roadmap look like? A: We want to target products for small businesses.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over the past few years, millions of consumers have bought into the deal of the day and group buying craze. But what about small to medium sized businesses? There are 26 million SMBs (small to medium sized businesses) in the US, who spend an average of $180,000 per year on non-payroll expenses, for a market size of $3.9 trillion in transactions. These businesses need discounts on web hosting, office equipment, paper and more. Rewardli, which is launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt, fills that gap by allowing small businesses to leverage their social graph to form buying groups and save money on purchases they make already in their day-to-day activities.  Basically, Rewardli features “always on” deals, where small business owners can visit the site’s marketplace buy what they need, when they need it, and receive cash back on all purchases. Over 70 vendors have signed up to offer cash back rewards, including Staples, FedEx Office, Expedia, GoDaddy, Skype, Travelocity and more.  The purchaser click on the deal, which is anywhere from 2 to 50 percent off, and will be led to the landing page of the vendor, but will include a checkout code when the business makes the purchase. For example, a businesses could receive a $10 cash back bonus when making travel plans via Priceline.  The social component comes in when the business owner signs into Rewardli. You can sign in with Facebook Connect and your LinkedIn account and as you and your friends buy from Rewardli, the deals get better. Users can also request a deal and then share the request with their social graph in order to get more engagement and increase the chance of the deal happening. Plus, Rewardli also offers a browser extension that automatically lets you know if you’re on a site that the startup offers a deal with.  Another popular use of Rewardli is forming private groups for accessing deals. For example, Rewardli (which graduated from 500 Startups’ first class), powers a private deal site for 500 Startups companies. On that private site, companies can access discounts on services offered by Amazon Web Services, Tapjoy and more.  The idea is to launch similar private sites for loyalty groups, conferences and alumni and member associations. Soon Rewardli will be powering private deals sites for the Performance Marketing Association, Startup North (Canadian tech blog), and two conferences (The Daily Deal Summit and LeadsCon). Rewardli makes money by taking a cut of each transaction that happens on the platform. In early testing, the startup has been saving users an average of 10% on their purchases, which equates to the startup making 3% on the total volume. In the future, Rewardli plans to sell a white label solution as a SaaS offering.  The company has also closed a seed round of $500,000 from 500 Startups and others.   Q&AJudges: John Ham (Ustream), Hilary Mason (Bit.ly), Kevin Rose (Milk), George Zachary (Charles River Ventures) HM: I love the chrome extension. Could this be available for every deal?  A: We could index that information. It could also be a way to onboard groups. GZ: Can you address competition? A: We’re not a daily deal site. Small businesses have different purchase behavior. We’re also demand driven.  KR: I’m confused by first transaction. When does the percentage off increase? A: We basically take a snapshot of your buying power, and give you a discount based on that. We can play with the formula any way we want.  JH: Congrats on launching. I like it, the initial focus on SMS is smart. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, Founder of Intuit Scott Cook, writer and former CTO at IMVU Eric Ries, and Instagram Co-founder Kevin Systrom gathered to discuss concepts from Ries’ new book, The Lean Startup.  While “lean” is thrown around a lot as modifier for contemporary businesses, Ries said that with his book he hopes to clear up one of the big misconceptions in defining the term; for starters, “lean” does not mean being cheap or frugal, it’s about being efficient and taking a smarter approach to the development of your product.  By way of example, Ries cited his favorite entrepreneurial movie, Ghostbusters, as the classic model for the development stages of startups. Act 1, he said, is all about who the guys are and how they come up with their great idea, whereas Act 3 finds them on the cover of magazines, having hit the big time.  Act 2, which is often short — and takes the form of a quick photo montage on screen — is the most important and often most overlooked part of a business’ development, in which the startup attracts their first customers. Here startups often suffer from the same repeat mistakes, unsure of when and how to pivot and which customers to listen to. By becoming more scientific in their approach to “Act 2”, startups can increase their chances of being successful. (And obviously by buying Ries’ book.) The Intuit founder joined in to say that this Act 2 had been a particularly difficult stage of growth both for Intuit and the many startups its acquired over the years — particularly interesting to hear from the co-founder of a company that’s currently seeing $3.85 billion in annual revenue. Cook said that time and time again his team was spending Herculean efforts on delivering products that ended up fizzling out without much fanfare or success. “I got sick of wasting months and years of engineering time on products that just weren’t going anywhere and weren’t changing customers lives”, Cook said. “So, as a result, we’ve recently blown up the way in which we develop products” — a drastic change from the way the company developed products five years ago.   As an example, Cook cited QuickBooks‘ desktop product. Formerly, he said, “we had huge teams” working on QuickBooks, but the company has recently done away with large format development, breaking product development down into teams “no bigger than four”, focusing on rapid development of a prototype and quick testing of the market.  Intuit is now focusing on launching prototypes that customers can test and tinker with over a matter of months, rather than taking what might be years to fine tune a particular product. In the old days, he said, this would happen over a much longer time span. “We’re now focused on how many weeks after hatching the idea it takes to get the product into the hands of the customers, to test and see how it works”. Ries then joined in to say that he is often asked by founders if there is some kind of magical elixir (or formula) for startup and product success; using Intuit as an example, he said that teams that are most often successful are so because senior management allows them to operate on “an island of freedom”, in which they can report progress only when they actually have something to report — they remain free to iterate, test, and are not beholden to a series of strict deadlines and check points. The key in pivoting, he said, is not to throw away a product or idea completely but to use what’s already there to better fit customers. Schonfeld, who was moderating the panel, said that he brought on Kevin Systrom of Instagram, because his company of only four people seems to be such a classic example of a “lean startup”. Systrom said that, in the early days of Burbn (which has since become Instagram), the team was operating under the presumption that it is always a startup’s first idea that will take off. As a result, it’s often difficult for founding teams to pivot away from their founding ideas to iterate and try new things.  Systrom said that he and his co-founders had a moment of recoking early on, where they sat down and attempted to define the one thing that made their business unique, and though posting photos was only one feature of Burbn, they decided that photos were what users loved the most and what made their business — at a base level — interesting. To refocus on one particular thing, he said, is extremely difficult for founders and often takes a lot of guts, especially seeing as founders will often have no idea at the time whether that decision will prove to be prescient. Systrom echoed what Ries had touched on earlier, in that the word “pivot” is often misused today as a process by which entrepreneurs throw out everything that they’re doing and completely refocus on something new. For Instagram, Systrom said, although the team made a pivot early on, the backend that he built for Burbn is still there, and his experience has taught him that it’s important to create something new out of what one has already built.  When to make the decision to pivot is, of course, not so clear. “I’m not sure it’s ever clear when founders should begin working on something new — that decisions isn’t clear, and it’s never really a particular point, it’s a gradient”, he said. If founders don’t see a kind of addictive behavior among early users, having users ask why the site is down (should that happen), then you know you’re onto something good. Cook then said that, from his experience of coaching more than 50 startups inside Intuit, those that run experiments based on a numeric hypothesis, then run the actual experiment and compare the two to see if the product meets expectations (or how far off it is) is the easiest way to have that “come to Jesus moment”. Startups should look for the surprises in those experiments — “search for and savor those surprises”, he said. He cited the example of Instagram, in Systrom’s (at the time) somewhat surprising and fingers-crossed decision to hone in on and narrow the focus to photos as the beginning of a success story he’s run across many times. Instead of vanity metrics — a term Ries has coined to denote those eye-grabbing yet ultimately misleading stats startups like to trump to press — Cook said that founders should focus on “love metrics”, meaning how much people love the product, how often they come back, how delighted they are. “If you’re not getting high activity from the users you already have, it’s time to pivot”, the Intuit co-founder said.  Cook also warned entrepreneurs against falling in love with the solution rather than focusing on being delighted by the problem. Often, founders end up finding — after much wasted time and frustration — that it is their original vision of the solution that is flawed. But if founders never lose sight of the problem, how teams attack the solution can remain more flexible, more iterative, and in the end make a product more likely to succeed. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInScott Cook, Kevin Systrom and Eric Ries on the Lean StartupLatest headlines delivered to you daily Web and mobile payments platform Dwolla announced today that it now includes integration with LinkedIn’s API, allowing users to send and receive payments to their connections on LinkedIn’s social network. Previously, Dwolla had integrated with Facebook and Twitter to offer similar functionality. And just last week, Dwolla added Foursquare support, too, allowing Dwolla users to passively check-in to a location when making a purchase. Dwolla, for those unaware, is a company attempting to disrupt how payment networks operate by creating a network that’s devoid of personal information. With the service, users can send and receive funds to and from other Dwolla users as well as with a select group of supported merchants. But most importantly, Dwolla’s distinction from other players in the payments space is its focus on cash, an under-represented market in electronic payments. Users fund Dwolla accounts with cash from their own bank account, and can then use the company’s Web-based platform or their mobile phone to perform the payments at rates that are often far less than on PayPal. The company has been busy adding new features over the past several months, rolling out FiSync integration for banks to eliminate ACH wait times, “Proxi” for proximity-based mobile payments, the aforementioned Foursquare integration, updates to its Android app and more. The new LinkedIn support is available now and can be enabled online in the settings. Dwolla is also ending the beta period for Proxi, and is rolling it out to all iOS users today as well. The update will be available in the iTunes App Store. With these additions, there are now 7 ways to send money via Dwolla: Dwolla ID, Facebook, Twitter, email, SMS, Proxi and LinkedIn. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, five VCs gathered to talk about the state of investing in Silicon Valley and what skills and qualities make a successful venture capitalist. James Slavet of Greylock, Joe Kraus of Google Ventures, Shervin Pishevar of Menlo Ventures, George Zachary of Charles River Ventures, and Rich Wong of Accel Partners each weighed in on how venture capitalists are trying to make a difference in the lives of startups as well as what the perception of venture capitalists has been traditionally and how that’s changing.  “As they say, 130 percent of the value [of a venture capitalist] is the day you write that check”, said Kraus, reciting — tongue in cheek — an age old saying among VCs and entrepreneurs. The Google Ventures investor continued on to say that what he sees as the true value of venture capitalists, and GV in particular, is not just providing the capital but helping entrepreneurs to hire the world’s best engineers.  A great management team will only take you so far, he said, and every startup goes through a “desert phase” in which they wander, seemingly a bit aimlessly, as they try to find customers and the right market fit. The tendency, he said, is to think that focusing on hiring a good management team is what will help lead you out of these desert phases, when in reality the anchor is a good engineering team.  On the flip side, for those aspiring venture capitalists out there, Kraus said that the key is to avoid fostering a dependence among your entrepreneurs — that venture capitalists have to teach their founders to be independent and self-sufficient. As simple as that may sound, many entrepreneurs are young, and that education (like what a good resume looks like or what to look for in your employees), while basic cannot be overlooked. Mark Zuckerberg is a classic case of an outlandishly successful entrepreneur who is also a top flight engineer, but what many people don’t talk about when they mention the Facebook Co-founder’s success, Pishevar said, is that he was also mentored closely by VCs and angels (like Ron Conway and Peter Thiel, to name a few). Mike Arrington weighed in to say that, in his experience, founders are also eager to have VCs help guide them — before even considering what engineers to hire — on simple things like how to find a good accountant. The panel seemed to agree that, beyond guiding entrepreneurs through strategic acquisitions of human capital, these day-to-day, ground-level things like hiring a good accountant are important and may get overlooked during the mentoring process. In light of this, Slavet then touched on what the role of venture capitalists will be over the next few years. The overall heft of venture capital is changing, he said, in such a way that the number of firms who invest all the way down the line (early stage to late stage) is decreasing. Ideally, today and in the future, VCs will be specialized in certain verticals, and their areas of expertise will give their startups strategic advantages at one point or another in their growth. Essentially, he said, the future of the business is investing in small chunks rather than mega rounds. “Specialization is very important”, Wong agreed.  Another important trait for venture capitalists? Being bold and entrepreneurial, Slavet said. The investor then went on to lay out three keys to being a successful VC, which included having strong instincts (usually from a product level) about opportunities in the market, being bold and aggressive in relation to those actionable opportunities, and the third is the importance of building a lasting relationships with entrepreneurs over time — not just being the embodiment of a check book. The more that VCs invest in their startups, both financially and with time and attention, the more successful all parties are likely to be. The panel also touched on the importance of locating one’s business in Silicon Valley, to which most of the VCs agreed that, while there are amazing business sprouting across the globe, there is still a strategic advantage to being in the valley, because that is where the large cap acquirers (and VCs and angels) are in highest concentration. You can read Sarah’s coverage here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There are quite a few nifty app search engines out there, but Chomp is trying to be the Google of search engines, not the AltaVista. Mobile apps are everywhere you look, but when it comes to finding the right app on the Android Market, the experience isn’t exactly enjoyable. Chomp’s iPhone app offered not only app search but personalized app recommendations as well, making the startup one of the early services to offer that mixed functionality.  In February, Chomp expanded its service to Android, by developing some patented technology to make Android app search a cleaner, easier, and less painful process. (You can read MG’s coverage here.) Then, in May, Chomp partnered with Verizon to offer an app search engine for the mobile network operator’s mobile app marketplace, V Cast.  It may not come as a surprise, then, that Chomp is continuing to target the Android Market with its search engine, with Verizon Wireless again partnering with the startup to integrate app search into its Android phones. Chomp and Verizon today announced that Chomp will be providing search functionality for all apps in Verizon apps, its newly redesigned mobile storefront.  With this new integration, Verizon Apps customers will be able to search for apps based both on name and function, meaning that users will be able to search for “Angry Birds” as well as by general description, like “kid’s games” or “expense trackers”. Thus, Chomp’s proprietary algorithm takes app search beyond simple search by name, as it gathers a more complete description of the app from all the information available on the various app marketplaces, Twitter, Facebook, blogs, and websites, etc. According to Chomp Co-founder Ben Keighran, the company spent over two years developing its unique app search formula and has applied for 11 patents based on these new app search technologies and user experience. Many of these pending patents are based on the supposition that app search is a completely different beast from web search and therefore requires an alternative approach tailored to the particular characteristics of app marketplaces and distribution. Verizon, the co-founder said, is of a similar mindset and was looking for a new solution to integrate with its forthcoming Android phones that improves on the old model. Chomp’s search fit the bill. Thus, the startup’s app search engine will power all user search on Verizon Apps, beginning on the Android smartphones that will be released later this fall — building on its recent partnership that allowed Verizon Wireless customers to search for apps across V Cast Apps and the Android Market.  It seems that Chomp and Verizon are getting very cuddly, to say the least. It’ll be interesting to see what’s next. Stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve just been given a demo of a new upcoming social networking service called AnyBeat, which was formerly known as Altly and was started by Veoh founder and former MySpace Music exec Dmitry Shapiro. I guess the screenshots below already kind of make this clear, but any social network that gets started these days is bound to look like Twitter, Facebook or Google+, both in terms of features and design. Sure enough, Anybeat is exactly that: a social network that borrows elements and features from those three popular services, without adding anything extraordinarily unique (for now). Sure enough, Anybeat looks really clean, and from what I’ve seen in the demo it’s a perfectly fine social network with all the necessary bells and whistles. My problem with it is that it lacks a raison d’être, especially given the head start enjoyed by the Twitters and Facebooks of this world. Alternatives are great, needed even, but users need a compelling reason to switch, too. There are some things that Shapiro and his crew have added to try and make Anybeat stand out from the pack, such as the ability to use pseudonyms, a hybrid system of following, grouping, direct messaging and instant messaging other members, a directory that enables people to discover new users to follow, integrated real-time and saveable search, a ‘CRED’ score that is sort of like an internal ranking of how great an Anybeat member a person is, and a special dedicated called ‘Questions’ which is, well, much like Quora or Facebook Questions. But ultimately, from what I’ve seen at least, there’s basically nothing that would make me want to use Anybeat if I’m already using Facebook, Twitter, and/or Google+ or really any other social network today. That might change in the future, but color me a skeptic for now. Anybeat has raised just over $1 million from Freestyle Capital, Social Leverage, DFJ, Howard Lindzon, Tom Anderson and other angel investors. The service is invite-only for the time being, but you can sign up to be alerted.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Aviary has made a name for itself over the years with its powerful photo editing – and other tools – and API for the Web and mobile.  Today, they’re somewhat changing course, business-wise, henceforth focusing primarily on serving the broad developer community with software development kits (SDKs). Using their SDKs, iOS and Android app developers can add photo editing features such as cropping, sharpening, red-eye removal, filters and effects and whatnot to their applications. Aviary says support for the iPad is underway, and that its SDK is 100% compatible with the forthcoming iOS 5. Both the iPhone and the Android SDK are free to use and implement. Developers have the ability to customize the photo editing functionality so it fits their apps’ look and feel. Aviary is launching its new SDKs with 30+ partners in tow. The company has also made a significant hire, attracting former Microsoft Chief of Staff Paul Murphy to head up its partnership efforts as their new VP of Business Development. Launch partners include picplz, Minus, Snapr, Fashism, Getaround, Pixable and Fotobabble.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today sees the launch of the Social Business Index, a project from social business services company Dachis Group. In essence, the information service aims to provide some insights into how ‘social’ companies are, and how they stack up against similar corporations in their respective industries and their competitors, and provide some ‘social business’ benchmarks by company, subsidiary, geography, department and brand. If Klout and PeerIndex are about trying to measure the ‘socialness’ and influence of people and rank them, Dachis Group basically wants to do the same for corporations, in real time. The company says the Social Business Index is but a lightweight glimpse onto its big data analytics platform. Currently, Dachis Group tracks over 26,000 brands from over 20,000 companies and over 100,000,000 social media accounts worldwide (plus “hundreds of millions” of other sources).  Over 300 large companies have signed on as beta participants, including giants like Samsung, Dell, Coca-Cola, Target, Levi’s and IBM. The data used to put together the Index is made up of company, employee, partner, vendor, customer, engaged market and influencer data, and derived from APIs and data obtained through purchases, partnerships, scraping, crowdsourcing and otherwise by its internal data team.  Says Jeffrey Dachis, founder and CEO of Dachis Group: “Unlike the typical ‘top 100′ lists that litter software vendor and social media consultant blogs, the Social Business Index is based on deep big data analysis of a company’s engagement globally and can give insight to companies on optimizing their social spend.” The top 5 today: Facebook, Google, News Corp, Coinstar and Wal-Mart, in that order. The Social Business Index is free, with advanced features available to companies and registered users for a fee.  Dachis Group says it will start selling an advanced set of SaaS applications with deeper views and approaches to understanding the data with a SaaS model, as well as premium pricing schemes, before the end of this year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Startup accelerator TechStars, arguably one of the best of its genre in the world, is today announcing the launch of its first thematically focused business kickstarter. Dubbed TechStars Cloud, the sub-accelerator will focus exclusively on backing cloud computing and infrastructure startups, and companies that work with OpenStack. For its first thematically focused accelerator, TechStars has attracted some high-profile mentors, including Pat Condon (founder of Rackspace Hosting), Jeff Lawson (founder & CEO of Twilio), Brad Feld (Foundry Group), George Karidis (CSO of SoftLayer), Jud Valeski (co)founder & CEO of Gnip), Rajat Bhargava (founder & CEO of StillSecure, Interliant), and many others.  The inaugural TechStars Cloud program will run from January to April 2012 in San Antonio, Texas, and will be co-organized with Rackspace Hosting. TechStars will select roughly ten companies – evidently focused on cloud computing and infrastructure – to participate. They will receive seed funding, mentorship from people like the aforementioned, and benefit from a number of perks available only to TechStars startups and alumni.  Interested companies should apply by October 21st for priority consideration, with a final application deadline of November 9th, 2011.  The program will be managed by Jason Seats, the founder of Slicehost (acquired by RackSpace in 2008), and Nicole Glaros, currently the Managing Director of TechStars in Boulder (she’s temporarily relocating to San Antonio).  In case you hadn’t heard, TechStars is also the subject of a documentary “reality TV” show on Bloomberg TV, which premiers tonight at 9 PM Eastern Time. In six episodes, viewers will receive an inside look of what the TechStars program is like for startups (more specifically, those who participated in the NYC program in early 2011) and mentors alike. Below is the new trailer for the show, which hasn’t yet been publicly released: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Apsalar, a San Francisco startup that offers mobile analytics, behavioral targeting and optimization solutions to iOS and Android app developers and publishers, has raised $5 million in funding in a round led by Thomvest Ventures.  Battery Ventures, DN Capital and other existing investors such as 500 Startups and Founder’s Co-op also participated in the round. Founded in 2010, Apsala has raised $5.8 million in funding to date. In a separate release, the startup announced that it has hired Anton Commissaris, a founding member of Mint.com’s executive team, to become its new ‘Chief Revenue Officer’. Apsalar’s set of tools helps app developers and publishers gain insights on how their apps are used through a self-service SDK or API, in order for them to identify and deliver personalized content and offers to users.  Commissaris, who became Director, Revenue & Business Development at Intuit’s Consumer Group after the acquisition of Mint.com, will be responsible for driving the company’s sales and business development activities. Don Butler, managing director at Thomvest Ventures, has joined Apsalar’s board of directors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mike first covered Amie Street back in 2006. At the time, he was a big fan. Back then, the startup was targeting a new music model, which allowed musicians to upload their songs to Amie Street’s platform, offering those tracks to listeners for free. The more downloads the songs attracted, the price would slowly increase — the price then indicating the song’s popularity. In what now looks like a savvy decision, Amie Street sold to Amazon last September for an undisclosed amount, deciding to focus its efforts on Songza: The social Internet radio service it acquired in 2008.  Today, after much iterating and tinkering, Songza is launching free mobile apps for iOS and Android that allow users to create and share personalized music collections — in the comfort of the cloud. Songza Co-founder and CEO Elias Roman likens the service to a “music concierge”, in that it serves users with playlists created by experts (and friends) for whatever mood or musical experience you could possible want. “The future of music will be driven by the convergence of expert and social curation”, the co-founder said.  While iTunes, Google Music, and beyond offer some neat customizable playlist options, Roman has a point. We are more likely to go in for playlists created by musicians, critics, and DJs we trust — as well as those created by friends — elaborate algorithms can only take one so far. Pandora and its Genome Project being a terrific example.   Today, listeners want big, free music collections that are easy to build, easy to keep fresh, accessible anywhere and sharable with their friends. Roman said that he thinks Songza offers just that kind of solution, as it features over 75,000 playlists created by actual people (including music experts, celebrities, artists and record labels), as well as allowing any user to create their own playlist from Songza’s library of over 14.5 million songs.  And speaking of Pandora (and Spotify to boot), Songza’s value proposition is significantly aided by the fact that it is free of audio advertisements and has no monthly listening limits. The startup also announced today that it has closed a seven-figure round of financing led by investors that had previously backed AmieStreet.com, including Deep Fork Capital as well as an “undisclosed strategic investor”. Also participating in the round was Geoff Judge, co-founder of 24/7 Real Media, who will be joining Songza’s board of directors.  The startup’s new mobile apps for iOS and Android  not only allow users to create personalized and sharable music collections in the cloud but also offers social discovery functionality via Facebook by allowing users to tap into the playlists their friends are listening to and creating.  Along with social discovery, Songza’s mobile app users can take advantage of expert-curated discovery through the startup’s bullpen of playlists that run the gamut in activities, genres, moods, and cultures. Users can find playlists for dinner parties, coding, or BBQ-ing, for example. Songza is trying to offer a music experience that is comparable in the breadth of its feature set yet distinguishable enough in concept from popular music services like Spotify, Pandora, and Turntable.fm to make a mark on the music space. A monopoly on streaming playlists seems to be the end game. But chime in and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, the audience winner was Quest.li. It’s a mobile application that turns real life goals into a game. Founder Danil Kozyatnikov traveled from Siberia to present. In the game you create different goals that earn you points. For example, Kozyatnikov said that he created a game to make it to TechCrunch Disrupt. Along the way, he had different goals to get Quest.li ready that he had to hit. He did, and that’s why he’s here. Users create their own tasks, but Kozyatnikov says that eventually he envisions others paying to opt-in to other quests. The winner would take some money in return. He said that when people compare Quest.li to Foursquare, he doesn’t really understand it. They’re different. They want to apply gaming mechanics to the everyday world, but it hasn’t been done in the right way at all, he said. “I wanted to build a company that would change the world,” Kozyatnikov continued. He has a team of five back in Russia creating the game. They’ve raised $225,000 so far. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInQuest.Li Social Treasure Hunt Startup PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with Quest.LiLatest headlines delivered to you daily If you were into PC gaming in the early 2000s, you know what Black & White is. Peter Molyneux’s 2001 classic published by EA gave every gamer the role they wanted: God. A new startup is aiming to bring that style of game into the social space. And more broadly, they aim to be the “Pixar of casual games”. Idle Games is launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt. Their first title is Idle Worship, a Black & White-esque game for Facebook. You play the role of a god, controlling villagers on an island to do certain tasks for you. While that may sound ominous, you can choose to be either good or bad in your actions. And overall, the game is light-hearted and fun. We’ve been playing with a beta version of the game for a few weeks; it’s solid. This first title by Idle Games, a startup founded by Rick Thompson (a co-founder of Playdom) and Jeffrey Hyman, aims to disrupt the casual gaming market by being an “anti-Zynga” of sorts. They believe social gaming is more about entertainment, interaction, and quality — not just button-mashing or mindless clicking. In many ways, they’re also going after the MMO market too. While the games will start on Facebook, you can imagine that they could quickly spread to other platforms as well. Like other casual games and MMOs, the emphasis for the business will be on virtual goods. But again, the Idle Games team is determined to create goods of the utmost quality so that users feel compelled to buy them and happy when they do. In this regard, Idle Games’ mission sounds a bit similar to that of Tiny Speck, makers of the soon-to-be-released game MMO Glitch. The Idle Games team also has a number of pending patents surrounding their particular style of social gameplay, they note. One key is their use of synchronous gameplay (as opposed to other games which typically are asynchronous). You can play alongside other “Gods” in the game, visit their islands, etc. Inside Social Games did a new preview of the game back in April. “The game must be your wingman and break the ice for you,” Hyman said on stage today, explaining why Idle Worship creates better gaming connections than other endeavors out there. All told, Idle Worship took the team of about 50 around two years to build. Again, the focus is on quality. They’ve raised roughly $9 million in funding so far.  Expert Judges Q&A Session: Josh Felser, Freestyle Capital; April Underwood, Twitter; Jim Lanzone, CBS Interactive; Michael Marquez, CODE Advisors JL: Why this game? There are a ton out there. A: We think it’s like the entertainment industry. It is a hits-driven business, we’re putting the emphasis on quality. It’s a bit like capturing lightning in a bottle, but we’re leveraging the social graph in unique ways. We think this is the first true social game on Facbeook. MM: Is this launched? A: In a few countries so far. MM: What about use engagement? A: The initial metrics are blowing away the norms. Over 50 percent are returning after week one. JF: Can you compare this to Zynga? A: Absolutely. I don’t know if you read last Friday’s WSJ, but it says on the front page, Zynga is an analytics company masking as a game company. We’re an entertainment and games company. Zynga is a black and white television. Everyone wants it until the color television comes out. That’s us. We care about the entertainment experience. AU: Your game looks engaging I want to play it. Tell me about the patents. A: We’ve invest two solid years of engineering to do the tech here. We have five patents filed for this stuff. Rendering engine, etc. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInIdle Games Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBack Stage Interview with Idle GamesLatest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been a long time since we were delighted and even slightly bemused by the utterly stripped down simplicity of Twitter. And let’s face it, there have been many pretenders to that simplistic interface crown since then. But Amen appears to have come up with a mellifluous new take on a mobile service which is tantalisingly simple, but designed to create masses amounts of data about things people like. Put simply, Amen is about finding the best of everything, often via arguments over the worst. To get the app go to getamen.com/tc in your Safari on the iPhone, sign up and download it OverTheAir. There are about 2,000 sign ups for Techcrunch Disrupt. Here’s how it works. You fire up the app on the iPhone or web browser and say a person, place or thing is “the best” or “the worst” ever, like like, the Best Dubstep track ever. Or perhaps, as actress Demi Moore (a beta user) puts it, “After Sex is the Best State For Amening Ever.” Hubbie Ashton Kutcher – an investor – “Led Zeppelin is the best rock band ever.” You can agree with this statement with an “Amen”. But with a “Hell no” you have to suggest an alternative answer. It’s a rigid structure, but you can post whatever you want.  Leaving aside reading between the lines of Demi’s post (as tempting as it is) the creation of the simple “Amen” or “Hell No” mechanic means Amen can create lots of definitive data about something. For instance, right now Amen says “The Best Place for Mexican Food in San Mateo is Taqueria La Cumbre. Of course, you might disagree… The location of any Amen statement is also built into the app, meaning Amen will start to tell you the best things around you. But more interesting than that, it generates a feed from users who see lots of potentially divisive statements from their friends.  This is when the gaming element kicks in because you can weigh in and vehemently disagree with a person. This not just a Dilike button – you can only disagree, typing “hell no” – by suggesting a replacement to the post.  That means Amen gets continually more finessed data each time. Crucially, each statement is a data point. So where as Twitter and its thousands of third party developers have had to apply tortuous natural language algorithms to the firehose in order to work out what the hell is going on, Amen has all this data and structure pre-built in to its system. It’s like one big brawl to find the best stuff, but this time with rules so simple you don’ even notice them. So the whole system is built from the ground up to bubble-up the best of everything in the world. Founderr Felix says users of the closed beta have been posting about TV shows, of coffee houses, The worst airline, the best position for sex. Literally everything. In addition people use it to create a kind of status update which their friends can agree or disagree with, e.g. “This bar is the best place for meeting Mike.” Then again it might be something more nuanced, such as…  Or more inside baseball:  Or more gamed:  The startup has been in closed private beta for the last month and now has 3,500 users, generating quite a lot of engagement. In one month those users created 30,000 statements, created 15,500 score cards and clicked the Amen button 80,000 times. An unintended use is using is as a Q&A platform, and then finding the thing you were after, like asking “Who is the best Dentist in Berlin” and people disputing that and entering their suggestion. People have also been talking about everything from brand to what the best jokes are, to the best playlists. Of course, it’s the brands element to this that has a lot of potential. Brands can get feedback on what people are saying about them, definitely, in realtime and to a high level of accuracy because it’s all structured data. This is much harder in Twitter because there is no structured data to mine, just people random words. Plus, Amen is de-duping all the words and lists, so there is no duplication, no fat in the system. And because its starts suggesting things to you, it can start to predict what you are planning to type. The same goes for location where the Amen iPhone might already know you are in a particular bar. Lists don’t just generate one answer – there is a long tail of answers after the top result. So they get the head and the long tail of results. Even an answer with only two votes will still appear in the system. Yes, the best movie ever made bay end up being agreed on (it’s 2001: A Space Odyssey). Amen’s game plan is engagement first, and get big. Then to enable discovery and utility. Monetisation comes afterwards and could consist of ad buys within the lists, like AdWords. The startup has raised a Seed funding from Index Ventures and Kutcher. The team itself is sterling. CEO and Founder Felix Petersen formerly founded Plazes, which was acquired by Nokia in 2008. There is also Caitlin Winner (MIT, Nokia) and Ricki Vester Gregersen (Input Squared), and Florian Weber, Twitter’s first engineer interviewed here). But finally, here is a problem. In theory Amen could be copyable, assuming someone can think out how to structure this data. It’s barrier to entry might therefore be lower. But then, how many startups already have Demi Moore as a private – poised to be public – beta user? Presentation:FacebookLinkedInAmen Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with AmenLatest headlines delivered to you daily There is a lot of junk on YouTube. But there are also a ton of undiscovered gems. Imagine if you could have a hand in surfacing the best stuff. And imagine how much more exciting that would be if you could do it live. That’s the basic premise of YouNow, a new startup launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt. An easier way to think about it may be as YouTube/Justin.tv mixed with The Gong Show. Or if you’re under 30, maybe think of it as Turntable.fm for live video. Participants go live with either a musical performance or a talk and they’re voted on in realtime. Thumbs-up votes buys the person more time, thumbs-down means they’ll soon be shoved off the stage. The YouNow team calls this social television. It’s certainly not television quality, but in many ways it’s more interesting. It’s a living, breathing form of entertainment in which the whole world can vote on what to watch. Using it for just a few minutes, I’ve already found two people I would consider to be genuinely talented, and three people who are clearly crazy. Fun times.  Of course, they’ll have to worry about the “Chatroulette” issue — that is, people exposing their genitals or being otherwise inappropriate. But the good news is that the voting scheme will quickly get rid of those types of users. The cool thing about YouNow is that it will get much better as it grows. Imagine hundreds of thousands or even millions of people watching a performance and voting. It could be a realtime American Idol on the web. Better, scale will allowed talented performers to get paid — there’s a tipping mechanism built into YouNow.  And performances can be streamed live from the web or a mobile device. So users can really play the game anywhere they go. The mobile apps should be ready in a couple of weeks. The service has raised $1 million so far from Union Square Ventures and Founders Collective. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInYouNow Social Television Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with YouNowLatest headlines delivered to you daily Facebook is the social network. But it’s still not really all that social. Yes, you chat here and “like” things there. But it’s not the same as going out to a bar with a group of friends. Shaker, a new startup launching today at TechCrunch Disrupt, aims to turn Facebook into that bar. The easiest way to think about it is as a mixture of Second Life, The Sims, and Turntable.fm all mixed together using your Facebook data and connections. Your Facebook profile becomes a walking avatar. Your pictures are placed on an actual (well, virtual) wall. You can choose what music is playing in the room for everyone to hear. And you interact with other Facebook users as avatars. You can even buy people drinks.  Shaker is a fun, interesting way to socialize on Facebook without feeling confined to the more static and flat elements of the service. Shaker’s idea is that if you can make Facebook itself more like a bar, real social interaction will happen more naturally. It’s one thing to chat with your friends on Facebook, but it’s extremely hard to try to meet new people. That’s what Shaker is hoping to enable. They do this by using color codes to show you not only your connections on Facebook, but also friends of friends. These are people you may not know, but you have at least one thing in common with — a mutual friend. Shaker also looks at profile information to show what else you may have in common with seemingly random people in the room. For example, you may have the same birthday as someone. Or you may both like the same band. Etc. Another elements include proximity based chat, a Tweet wall, and a “smart phone” social discovery tool to look up information about people in the room. The team has been alpha testing a version of the Shaker app in their homebase of Tel Aviv, Israel. The response has been extremely viral so far, the team says. So much so, that they had to shut it down to stop word from getting out too much before Disrupt. As a part of the Disrupt launch, they’ve created a special TC Disrupt-themed room for attendees to hang out in . Shaker has raised about $3 million in funding so far. Expert Judges Q&A Session:  Josh Felser, Freestyle Capital; April Underwood, Twitter; Jim Lanzone, CBS Interactive; Michael Marquez, CODE Advisors AU: There are some interesting concepts here, to make social more fun and richer. But users only have so much time. What are you competing with for time? A: The time we’re competing with is the time you spend anyway on Facebook. That time is huge — almost 2 hours a day for young people. We’ll make it more fun and casual. JF: Love the demo. But synchronous model is hard. Asynchronous as well? A: We did bet on synchronous. It’s a big bet, but it’s one we’re making. JF: What’s ratio of registered users to simulataneous? A: We had to block the invitations, it was going viral. We were at 80,000 MAUs after blocking invitations. People complaining that the bars are too crowded. JL: It reminds me of casual Second Life. But it doesn’t have the gaining users problem. And it gives them something to do. MM: I like what you’re doing to figure out what you have in common with other users. But what are you doing more than making it about inviting other people? A: The location system isn’t yet built-in. But we’re using algorithms to bring together people who will be relevant to you. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInShaker Social Media Startup Battlefield Presentation at Disrupt SF 2011Backstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with ShakerLatest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Everpix is a new service that automatically organizes and combines all your photo libraries into an elegant interface, whether they’re stored on the desktop or in the cloud. It supports traditional desktop software programs, like Adobe Lightroom, Aperture and iPhoto, for example, as well as online services like Facebook, Flickr, Picasa and Instagram. It will soon be able to automatically upload photos from all your mobile devices, too. And it even supports integration with Gmail. Everpix runs as a little utility on your computer (Mac-only for now), fetching the photos from online services and local galleries. You can configure which folders it should monitor, so it won’t import all the photos on your hard drive, and the online services you use. With the Gmail integration, Everpix discovers the photos sent you via email and organizes them along with the others. In a later release, IMAP support will be added to support other email programs.  After the photos are imported, Everpix uses a feature called “assistive curating” to create attractively laid-out album groupings called “Moments.” These are similar to iPhoto’s “Events,” but are built for you automatically, which saves you from the hassle of album creation and organization. Not surprisingly, you can see an Apple-like design aesthetic here, given that two of Everpix’s Co-founders, Pierre-Olivier Latour and Kevin Quennesson, each spent several years with the company. Meanwhile, the third Co-founder, Wayne Fan, was previously at frog design. The service can also detect bad photos, like those that are blurry, out of focus, or under or overexposed. These photos are automatically hidden from view, but you can choose to unhide them, if desired. By default, all photos on Everpix’s Web interface are private, but you can make a collection public with just one click, or you can simply click which photos in a collection you want to share. Everpix includes a social component, too, allowing you to connect with other users, like family members for example, so you can immediately see their new photos without any need for them to first organize them, email them, or upload them to a service like Facebook. The best part about Everpix, however, may be it’s “set it and forget it” nature. After the one-time installation and configuration, there’s nothing else you have to do. You can continue to work with your photos as you would normally, saving them to your same folders, uploading the ones you want to share to the services you prefer, etc. But when you want to refer back to your entire photo collection, Everpix is there, with every photo you ever took in one central interface, available on the Web or, soon, on mobile. Everpix will launch first for Mac and iOS, with support for online services limited to Facebook and Gmail initially. Windows and Android versions are in the works. The company’s business model will be freemium, but the pricing structure has not yet been determined. The company, which was founded under the name “33Cube,” is currently in the process of raising seed funding from 500 Startups and other unnamed angel investors. You can sign up to participate in the private alpha on the Everpix homepage here. 100 people, chosen at random, will be invited to join the early tests.  Judges Q&A Expert Judges: Aileen Lee (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers), Dustin Moskovitz (Asana), Michael Parekh (MPi Capital), Joshua Schachter (Jig) DM: Looks beautiful, but rubbed the wrong way by name “Everpix.” Also, I’m Path investor. Not entirely original. What’s the longer term vision? A: We want to build something where you get a bunch of photos and we extract the best ones. JS: It’s 2011, but there’s yet to be a photo-sharing service with returns investors would look for. How to be something we need? Do people care about long-term photo storage? A: So many people use email for photo-sharing. But we grab photos from all your devices too. You don’t have to change your behavior – if you email photos, that’s fine. They’re all in Everpix’s cloud. AL: Who is initial target market? A: Everyone who doesn’t want to hassle with photos. MP: Business model? Infinite storage? A: Freemium, we don’t know limit yet. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInEverpix Pic Management App Battlfield Presentation at Disrupt SF 2011Backstage Interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with EverPix at Disrupt SF 2011Latest headlines delivered to you daily The cloud is now your hard drive. And not just a few dozen Gigabytes, Terabytes or even Petabytes, but all of it – infinite storage – for only $10 per month. This is the incredible promise of the new TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Bitcasa. The company is launching a new cloud storage, syncing and sharing service that blows away its competitors, including hard drive manufacturers and online services like DropBox and SkyDrive, with ease. In fact, beyond the pricing and limitless storage, the most disruptive thing about the service is its complete integration with your device. You don’t see it, it’s not an icon on your desktop, you don’t drag-and-drop files or folders into it. Instead, you write to the cloud when you save a file on your computer. The cloud is your hard drive, and your actual hard drive is just the cache. The idea of using the cloud to store files or sync files between devices is not new. Dropbox, SkyDrive, Google Docs, Amazon and countless others have been offering online storage for some time. Plus, companies like Mozy, Carbonite and Backblaze use the cloud to back up your files. Other services, like Megaupload or YouSendIt revolve around sharing files through the cloud. But Bitcasa is not like any of those services. It doesn’t move files around. It doesn’t sync files. It deals in bits and bytes, the 1’s and 0’s of digital data. When you save a file, Bitcasa writes those 1’s and 0’s to its server-side infrastructure in the cloud. It doesn’t know anything about the file itself, really. It doesn’t see the file’s title or know its contents. It doesn’t know who wrote the file. And because the data is encrypted on the client side, Bitcasa doesn’t even know what it’s storing. So if you want to cloud-enable your 80 GB collection of MP3’s or a terabyte of movies (acquired mainly through torrenting, naughty you!), go ahead. Even if the RIAA and MPAA came knocking on Bitcasa’s doors, subpoenas in hand, all Bitcasa would have is a collection of encrypted bits with no means to decrypt them.  If you’re still having a hard time wrapping your head around this idea, think of it like this: instead of relying on the fallible and limited hard drive in your computer (or soon, your phone), your data is stored on an array of thousands of hard drives and streamed to you on demand. And in order to deal with the “offline” problem, the files you use the most are intelligently cached on your computer, allowing you to work when the cloud goes down, which is rare, as well as when you don’t have an Internet connection, which is more common. Sharing files via Bitcasa is simple too: just copy and paste a file’s or folder’s link (a URL, available on right-click) and send to someone via email, IM or some other service. They click the link to have the file delivered directly to their desktop. And the pricing! How on earth is it so cheap? That’s the easy part, actually. Explains Bitcasa CEO Tony Gauda, $10/month still gives the company large margins. The fact is, 60% of your data is duplicate. If you have an MP3 file, someone else probably has the same one, for example. Each person only tends to have around 25 GB of unique, personal data, he says. Using patented de-duplication algorithms, compression techniques and encryption, Bitcasa keeps costs down (way, way down, but that’s it’s secret sauce), which is what makes it so affordable. Bitcasa also explained that a freemium model is on its way with less-than-unlimited storage for free.  This service sounds almost too good to be true, leaving us with questions that need still need to be answered. Does it really work? Does it slow down your computer? Can it scale? The company is positive it’s ready, but we need to see it to believe it. Bitcasa currently has 20 patents for its technology and plans to add more in the future. It will also offer mobile applications that run in the background to do on mobile what it does on the desktop today. And it will work on other features, like real-time video transcoding, so your movies can stream to any device, without any manual effort on your part. There are even more things in the works, too, but those are being kept tightly under wraps for now. The Bitcasa founders include CEO Tony Gauda, Joel Andren and Kevin Blackham, whose combined work experience includes time spent at MasterCard, VeriSign, Classmates.com, Mozy and more. In total, Bitcasa has raised $1.3 million from from Andreeson Horowitz, First Round Capital and Pelion Venture Partners. Bitcasa will be free while in limited beta trials. You can sign up for access here. Disclosure: CrunchFund is an investor in Bitcasa.   Expert Judges: Aileen Lee (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers), Dustin Moskovitz (Asana), Michael Parekh (MPi Capital), Joshua Schachter (Jig) MP: Sounds terrific. What’s the secret sauce? A: We have 20 patents. Most interesting, predictive capability – knows what you need before you need it. Users don’t have to do anything differently. DM: Market research on who needs this? (People already using online services) A: Really about managing your data. You don’t have to worry about managing your data anymore. AL: How to compete with Apple, Amazon, Google? A: We’re only focused on storage. We’re cross-platform. Apple’s product would only work with Apple products, for example. JS: Can you stream movies not cached? A: If you have bandwidth to support it. But our cache is very intelligent. Plus, people over estimate the size of data they have. MP: Limits to use? Each user has own account, and can share a link (file, folder) with other users. But can’t share a file to entire Internet. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInPressly Tablet Reading Platform Startup Battlefield PresentationTechCrunch Disrupt finalist Pressly is an HTML5-based platform that turns online publications into tablet-friendly websites that work on the iPad, Android tablets or the BlackBerry PlayBook. The sites it produces are nearly indistinguishable from their native counterparts, like Flipboard and Zite for example, offering a similar experience for browsing through articles, images and videos. Navigation is designed for the tablet interface, using common gestures like multi-touch swipes and pinches. Pressly’s platform includes five customizable templates as a starting point, each designed with the needs of different publishers in mind. One template is more text-driven, while others are better for browsing through photos or videos. Like native apps, navigating a Pressly-built site uses intuitive gestures, like a 2-finger swipe up or down to reveal quick navigation and a pinch to close articles.  The templating engine can pull in a variety of data feeds, too, like JSON, XML, RSS or Twitter and WordPress content. Despite the end product’s similarities to today’s popular tablet magazines, Pressly isn’t designed to be an alternative to building a native app for the iPad or another tablet. In fact, the company isn’t even a big proponent of saving URLs as homescreen icons. Instead, Pressly wants to leverage the popularity of tablets’ most popular application, the browser, to immediately deliver tablet-optimized experiences to those surfing the Web. In addition, because these sites are just HTML pages, publishers can integrate all the common functions found in a traditional website, including analytics, advertising, payment processing, store finders and more. And Pressly includes its own ad platform which lets publishers and advertisers insert rich media ads into the tablet-friendly site. These ads can include videos, photos, links, hot spots, social sharing buttons, detailed tracking mechanisms and they can even be displayed as 360-degree immersive views. Pressly is currently working with Canadian Living Magazine, Transcontinental Media Group and The Toronto Star (Canada’s largest daily) as well as with the The Economist’s digital team in New York on a new, yet-to-be-announced product prototype. If you’re on a tablet computer, you can see a demo of Pressly in action here. The company’s founders include CEO Jeff Brenner, CTO Peter Kieltyka, Marketing and Media Lead Tobin Dalrymple and Business Development Lead Chi Chen. Brenner and Kieltyka previously founded a consulting business called NuLayer, which built over 17 successful Web and iOS projects including the popular sports app for theScore, as well as social photo sharing startup Crowdreel, winner of the 2009 Twitter Chirp conference. NuLayer has a minority partner in theScore, but Pressly itself has no direct funding. Pricing for the platform has yet to be determined.   Judges Q&A Expert Judges: Aileen Lee (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers), Dustin Moskovitz (Asana), Michael Parekh (MPi Capital), Joshua Schachter (Jig) AL: Really beautiful. Need to focus on certain verticals. A: We feel publishers need this. This isn’t competing with Flipboard directly. DM: I’m Flipboard investor, not sure your product is there yet. A: Flipboard is iPad. Pressly is a Web tech (HTML5). Also, publishers can control content better. There’s room for us. Flipboard does content discovery on iPad, Pressly uses Safari or a Web browser to deliver tablet-friendly site. MP: From user perspective, looks great. Biz model question about revenue share. A: No upfront costs on revenue share with publishers – a win-win situation for both. If consumers love and is engaging, publishers can increase CPM’s. Can start bringing ad inventory to publishers. JS: I like the ads. Worry is people with dev shops can build whatever they want, leaving you with newspapers, those without tools to build this. A: Built platform where publishers can build on top of. Publishers are good at telling stories, not great at innovating like this. Backstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with PresslyLatest headlines delivered to you daily Today, TechCrunch Disrupt finalist Verious is launching the world’s first marketplace for mobile application components – that is, the libraries, the SDKs (software development kits), the add-ons, the open source code and other third-party services which specifically cater to mobile app developers. Until now, there hasn’t been a centralized repository of these resources. But Verious isn’t just organizing mobile app components on its site, it’s also offering a way for developers to sell their components to others through a copy-protected licensing system. According to analysts, the market for mobile application development services is expected to reach $100 billion by 2015, as many independent developers are now working on a combination of consumer-facing apps alongside mobile app component development. That no one has thought to launch a service like this until now is actually somewhat surprising.  With Verious, the goal is to help developers speed their time to market by offering the components they need, but don’t have either the time or resources to build themselves. For example, there’s a 3D globe which consists of 20,000 lines of code, built over the course of 5 months with $50,000 worth of labor. It’s listed on the site for less than $1,000 to license. Pre-launch, Verious’ founders talked to thousands of developers and have compiled a list of 1,000 components along with $100,000 worth of component requests. The size of this initial catalog demonstrates the need for such a service’s existence in the first place – there are a lot of mobile app components for developers to keep up with! In addition to organizing the components on the site for easy discovery, mobile app developers are allowed to test out the components in a 30-day free trial. They can also post and “follow” component feature requests, so sellers know which ones to prioritize in their development to meet market demands. In the future, the ability to rate, review and comment on components will be added, too.  The site’s patent-pending License Manager lets sellers enforce different types of licensing models, including annual fees, perpetual fees, volume-based tiered pricing, source code buyout and more. Verious will charge a 20-40% commission on components (20% for charter developers), a referral fee for premier partners listings SDKs, and revenue share for server-side partners. At launch, Verious supports iOS and Android, but will expand to other platforms as the market demands. Verious’ management team is composed of industry veterans with CEO Anil Pereira, VP Marketing Don Pitt and Web Strategy/Ops head Michael Coleman. Their combined work experience includes time spent at VeriSign, American Express, DataSphere, VMWare, Samsung, Openwave and TRUSTe. The company, founded in 2011, is backed by seed and angel investors including Charles River Ventures, X-G Ventures, Mark Britto, Iggy Fanlo, Gil Penchina, Krishna Vedati and others.   Judges Q&A Expert Judges: Aileen Lee (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers), Dustin Moskovitz (Asana), Michael Parekh (MPi Capital), Joshua Schachter (Jig) AL: Estimation of addressable market? A: 1) App services market – $100 B by 2015, plus app tools market – $30 B by 2015, according to analysts. DM: Dev tools companies have failed to make business of it. Who is doing it well? A: Plenty of companies doing marketplace models out there. MP: Quality control? Rating system? A: Developers have to produce a sample app with the code, or have an app on the App Store. Yes, ratings, reviews, community are coming. JS: How to be first stop for developers? A: Every day, companies are launching SDKs. Companies are working with Verious now to get their libraries listed. They want to be on site to grow their install base. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInVerious Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with VeriousLatest headlines delivered to you daily Spool is a new service aimed at addressing the problem created by the multi-device, multi-screen environment we now live in, where the content consumption experience can vary widely from platform to platform. On iOS devices, for example, you can’t watch Flash videos without serious workarounds. On an iPod Touch or other standalone media player, you need a Wi-Fi signal in order to browse the Web. But with Spool, you don’t have to think about these sorts of things. Any Internet content, including audio, video and text, can be made available for immediate, offline viewing on mobile, simply by using the Spool app, browser add-on or bookmarklet. And because Spool is intelligent, it knows what part of a webpage to save, and what part to discard. Simply put, Spool works like an evolved version of Instapaper, the popular service that saves long-form Web articles for later reading either on your computer, iPhone, iPad or Kindle. Like Instapaper, there’s also this idea that what works on the Web isn’t necessarily what works well on mobile. But where Instapaper cleans up and reformats text for easier reading, Spool works with any media type, whether it be text, audio or video. It can even parse multi-page content for you, saving the entire article or forum thread, for example, not just the first page.  The service uses artificial intelligence and a computer vision engine to read the webpage the way a human would and extract the relevant parts, while discarding the rest (like the ads, the header, the footer, etc.). Most importantly, perhaps, it converts video into mobile-friendly, HTML5-based formats that play within any modern smartphone or tablet browser. The videos and other content are also cached to the device, for offline access. In the short-term, Spool solves the problem of content incompatibly that arises, for the most part, from Apple’s decision to ban Flash from its mobile devices and publishers’ delays in moving to the iOS-friendly Web standard HTML5. It also provides a viable workaround for the still-present “offline” problem that results from poor cellular coverage and dead spots.  Spool’s founders, Avichal Garg and Curtis Spencer, admit that the Flash problem is slowly going away, but they believe that the connectivity issues will remain for some time. For now, Spool lets you take snapshots of a page using its mobile app, Firefox or Chrome extension, or browser bookmarklet. These saved pages and related media can be viewed within the app or online, and favorited for easy access or archived when you’re finished viewing. The storage space Spool uses can also be adjusted in Settings, and for Android users, storing content to the SD card is supported. In the future, Spool will focus on adding deep linking (automatically pulling down the content for the links within an article you saved), plus intelligent “spooling” of your favorite sites without an explicit request on your part. The app is free for now (in private beta), while the founders consider monetization options involving freemium services, search offerings and mobile CDN models. Spool is currently addressing some real-world problems, but arguably not those that will be around forever. Spool’s technology, on the other hand, may have a longer shelf life than Spool’s apps. The company expects five patents to come of its artificial intelligence, computer vision, video extraction, video transcoding and browser emulation infrastructure. The amount of funding Spool received is currently undisclosed. Q&A Judges:Expert Judges: Aileen Lee (Kleiner, Perkins, Caufield & Byers), Dustin Moskovitz (Asana), Michael Parekh (MPi Capital), Joshua Schachter (Jig) AL: How to grow business? A: People are already doing this behavior. Big fans of Dropbox, Evernote – sites that have solve pain points for big parts of online population. DM: What about when network connections are better? A: Network infrastructure can’t keep up with number of users. Even if it does, that means Spool gets faster pipes, loads pages faster on phones. MP: Love it, can’t wait to try it. How does it compare to competition? A: A lot competitors focused on article content (Instapaper). This is about different types of content, too. (Videos, audio, etc.) JS: Do people really return to read stuff they archive to read later? A:  We can also intelligently fetch things for you in advance, at some point in the future. But yes, it’s not an immediately mainstream product. Presentation:FacebookLinkedInSpool Startup Battlefield PresentationBackstage interview:FacebookLinkedInBackstage Interview with SpoolLatest headlines delivered to you daily Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, Michael Arrington sat down with Sequoia’s Doug Leone. While he’s been with the venture capital firm since 1988, not many people know who he is because he keeps a low profile. But he’s also a guy who has been vital to Sequoia returning something like $15 to $20 billion to investors over his time. It was a great talk. Of note, Leone said that he doesn’t take photographs. Why? Because he hates the idea of being chained to the past in any way. Hardcore. Having said that, when Mike asked him about the past, he obliged. Leone noted that things were very different back in 1988. Back then, the average entrepreneur was something like 45 years old. It was a different time — startups were focused on the infrastructure layer. Today, entrepreneurs are 22 or 23 or even younger, and they’re focused on the application layer. Leone noted that Sequoia has never had a fund that has lost money. There was one time when things were looking like they may go that way in 2002, so the Sequoia partners got out their checkbooks so that no one could say that they lost money investing with Sequoia Capital. The $15 or $20 billion returned so far has come from something like $5 billion raised. Leone noted that 90 percent of of their capital comes from endowments and foundations, so these billions returned are going towards good causes and making the world better. Leone also used his time on stage to make it clear that Sequoia is not just a late stage investor. To the contrary, their goal is to be the first dollars invested in a company. “We wanna be the first business partner that a young entrepreneur has,” he said, noting that the DNA of a company is often set in the first 30, 60, or 90 days. “We want to assist in creating the best DNA Silicon Valley has ever seen.” When Mike asked Leone for advice for his recently launched CrunchFund (in which Sequoia is an LP), Leone indicated he may have some learning to do. In Leone’s view, startups have two advantages: stealth and speed. But Mike comes from a world (TechCrunch) where speed is important but there is no stealth. He said Mike would have to learn to advise startups to “avoid cocktail hour” and stay away from press. Yeah, that won’t be easy. On the topic of “what’s hot now”, Leone was honest. “I have no clue,” he said. But he said that’s an advantage. Over the years, the hottest companies they’ve seen: YouTube, Yahoo, Zappos — were flying under the radar before they surfaced. Those are the deals Sequoia loves and he thinks they’re attuned to find those things by now worrying about “what’s hot”. Latest headlines delivered to you daily At the TechCrunch Hackathon on Saturday, the 108-year-old, All-American automaker, Ford, teamed up with the newly-American music service, Spotify, to showcase the growing opportunities for developers looking to take advantage of in-car gadgetry to integrate their apps and mobile services.  Today at TechCrunch Disrupt in San Francisco, Ford looks to continue pushing forward with in-car connectivity and gadgetry, announcing a partnership with Bug Labs — an open-source hardware and software provider that tinkerers and engineers can use to create their own digital devices. The two companies will be collaborating on a new in-car research platform, named OpenXC, which looks to transform the car into a plug-and-play platform that will support open-source hardware and software to allow developers to make the car a playground for all kinds of cool new technologies. OpenXC, which is based on Bug Labs’ Bug System, will allow users to create a personalized driving experience through add-ons like visual and audio feedback interfaces and environmental sensors and safety devices — simply by snapping Bug Labs’ hardware modules into the consoles of vehicles.  According to K. Venkatesh Prasad, the senior technical leader for Ford Research and Innovation, OpenXC is designed to create a platform that is completely open to the developer community, allowing engineers and hackers to offer cool in-car solutions to the consumer at reasonable prices. While Bug Labs has teamed with developers and enterprises like Verizon, Sprint, AT&T, Pitney Bows to design and test innovative devices, Ford is the first automotive OEM to collaborate with Bug Labs.  Across the board, cars are getting smarter, and the opportunity for innovation in automotive connectivity continues to grow. Ford said that it hopes to use the OpenXC research project as a way to test new entertainment and connectivity solutions, and get a head start on the changing (and increasingly more technological) landscape, like fast-changing content preferences and “buy as you can” rental app solutions. As Asia is poised to become a big source of vehicle sales over the next decade, Prasad gave the example of a Ford owner who loves the game of cricket. Through OpenXC, drivers will be able to purchase a $15 cricket module from a local ford dealer, one that’s designed by a local developer and approved by Ford, to plug into the master control board in the car that would play a community radio station dedicated exclusively to cricket. After the season is over, the driver could replace the module with another, sport-focused or otherwise. OpenXC is designed to give both Ford researchers and third-party developers a low cost sandbox in which they can share, test, and verify any and all concepts related to in-car connectivity. The idea is to allow its open platform to give communities of drivers the ability to customize their driving experience, while at the same time allowing manufacturers like Ford to avoid building customizable vehicles for specific markets. Instead, through OpenXC’s sandbox, Ford is opening up that customization to third parties, enabling personalization of the driving experience to continue with participation from multiple sources without having to break the bank.  At Disrupt, Ford and Bug Labs demonstrated the OpenXC platform using a Ford Fiesta to showcase a prototype “Fuel Economy Challenge” app that uses Bug Labs’ hardware and software modules to provide a LED fuel efficiency display module in the vehicle’s cockpit. When up and running, the app illuminates the windshield with a display presenting the driver’s current fuel efficiency. Drivers then have access to realtime data on how others in the challenge are performing, and who is driving most efficiently. It’s nice to see a once-troubled automaker finding new ways to remain relevant and provide its drivers with all the benefits of the mind-melting technology being developed by young American startups and tech companies. Developers and engineers, definitely look out for this one. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Searching for apartments sucks. It’s nerve-racking, frantic, and searchers often find themselves settling for less. In July, we covered the seed raise of Nestio, a young TechStars grad that allows users to save apartment listings from across a variety of sites all in one place, and collaborate with their roommates in realtime during apartment searches by sharing listings, photos and notes. Launching at TechCrunch Disrupt today in beta is another young startup looking to transform the way we find and rent apartments, making the process just a little bit less of a pain in the ass — and maybe even enjoyable. ApartmentList is an apartment matching engine that uses social networks and its proprietary matching technology (a.k.a. some deep math) to make the apartment search a more personalized experience. Renters connect their social networks to the startup’s platform and answer a series of targeted questions, which then enables the engine to pare down thousands of apartment listings to those that fit the needs of the individual searcher, a la Netflix and Amazon. By providing an apartment recommendation and discovery engine, ApartmentList is essentially attempting to become the Pandora of apartment searches — or in its social and matching functionality, the Match.com of apartment searches. Take your pick. The startup has already added some interesting advisors and board members, including the founders of Rent.com, Bills.com, as well as the Chairman of StumbleUpon — among others — to help guide it in a space that is ripe for innovation.  To boil it down, ApartmentList offers Facebook integration to automatically personalize apartment recommendations based on users’ activities and those of their friends, enabling users to customize their lifestyle of choice. The service also asks entertaining questions like, “what’s your favorite birthday cake?” and “do you have any money in the stock market?” — that though they may seem a bit tongue-in-cheek, actually go a long way towards refining the apartment recommendations it serves, said Founder and CEO John Kobs. So far, the startup pulls from over 1 million apartment listings (and counting), which it provides on a map interface that allows users to see what points of interest surround the apartment, like restaurants, shopping, and public transportation options, meant to help apartment searchers make more informed decisions. The engine also provides consistent listings, along with editorial content on individual cities and neighborhoods within each listing as well as thousands of photos of apartments and locales so that users can peruse through visual data to find their apartment of choice.  Another key feature: ApartmentList offers collaborative apartment hunting with friends via Facebook so that peers can inform you if the street you’re considering has a severe shortage of accessible parking, for example. As the U.S. rental market continues to grow, the world is badly in need to apartment search options that provide consistent and trustworthy listings and rental data — as well as a service that adds some entertainment to what is often a teeth-grinding process. The visual elements of ApartmentList’s engine, complete with interactive maps and images and easy search, add a much-needed revamp to the black-and-white listings of craiglist and other listings resources.  As many contemporary web businesses are building recommendation engines for personalized and social discovery to old models, it is only natural that apartment rental should have its own. Just like Netflix, Pandora, and Amazon before them, ApartmentList’s engine gets smarter (and serves better recommendations) the more questions you answer and the more it learns about your interests and preferences. As it stands as of beta launch, ApartmentList is already providing a great tool, but it will need to continue adding to its reservoir of apartment listings if it hopes to compete long term with the bigs already in the space. But so far, the startup is off to a great start. For more on ApartmentList, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily It was nine months ago when we first wrote about TestFlight, the super-simple over-the-air (OTA) iOS app distribution service. As we noted at the time, the service seemed perfect for developers looking for a better way to test their apps before releasing them into Apple’s App Store. Since then, many developers have found it to be the perfect solution — it seems like pretty much every developer I encounter now uses it. Today, TestFlight version 2 is rolling out, and with it comes a full SDK that is likely to push any developer not yet using the service, over the edge. Here are the new features: Crash ReportsReal time reports with environment snapshots, full session activity, and your NSLogs. Check PointsMonitor tester engagement and watch as they progress through your app or take unexpected turns. In-App QuestionsGet the answers you need right when you need them. Ask multiple choice or open answer questions in real time the moment a checkpoint is reached. FeedbackGather more feedback with in-app forms or via tester email replies, which is all neatly organized in your dashboard and enables immediate responses. In-App UpdatesPrompt testers to install the latest version of your app and they can update instantly over-the-air. Enterprise IPA SupportIf you have an Enterprise Developer account through Apple, you get the added benefit of unlimited devices with all the TestFlight features at no charge. TestFlight fully supports Enterprise IPA’s. In other words, the best just got a lot better. And the key part is the that even with all the upgrades, the service remains free for developers to use. TestFlight says that while they reserve the right to charge for more premium add-ons down the road, these features are all now a part of the core functionality and will remain free. Currently, everyone from Adobe to MTV to Tumblr to Spotify to Instagram are using TestFlight. It’s great for distribution (which used to ridiculously involve the sending and manual installing of IPA’s and provisioning files), and now it’s going to be even better for diagnostics and analytics. If there’s any service that stands out as something Apple should buy, this is it. TestFlight notes that the SDK has been in testing with some developers for a few months. At least one of those developers notes that it’s “fucking fantastic”. Say no more.  This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – StatSheet, which specializes in realtime content automation, is expanding beyond sports to apply its technology to other data-intensive verticals where the cost of creating high-quality content remains high. The company has decided that a new name will better reflect its broadened focus, and will henceforth be known as Automated Insights. Furthermore, the startup has secured $4 million in new funding to spur growth. The financing round was led by Court Square Ventures and OCA Ventures, with participation from IDEA Fund Partners and other existing investors. They raised $1.3m earlier. For the record, Automated Insights will be entering new markets (think finance, weather, real estate etc.) but will maintain the StatSheet brand for its sports offerings whilst doing so. Automated Insights’ technology automatically turns raw data into narrative content and visualizations. The content that is output is written entirely by software but can subsequently be formatted as headlines, summaries, and long-form articles, and then distributed via the Web, mobile applications and through social media. They recently applied its technology to power Major League Baseball (MLB) coverage. The company is now looking to debut team-centric sites and mobile apps for all 32 NFL and 244 NCAA Division I College Football teams (see an example). Since November, the company says, its software has generated over 100,000 articles (covering both NCAA Basketball and MLB).   Worth noting: Automated Insights has gotten this far with only 12 employees, in less than a year, because most of what they do is completely automated. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s been a year since social rewards and analytics company, Badgeville took home the prize for Audience Choice Winner at TechCrunch Disrupt 2010. Today, Founder and CEO Kris Duggan spoke at this year’s Disrupt to talk about how far the company has come over the past 12 months. When Badgeville started, he says, it had 4 people, $300,000 in seed funding and 10 beta customers. Now it has 35 full-time employees, has raised $15 million in capital and has 85 paying customers, including big names like NBC, Discovery and Universal Music. It’s also pulling in 5 to 10 million in sales, notes Duggan. Not bad for just one year in. But in even bigger news, Badgeville is now launching its latest product: Social Fabric, a new technology based on users’ online behavior. This “behavior graph,” as Duggan calls it, is different from the “social graph” found on Facebook and Twitter, which is limited to a user’s network of friends. It’s also more advanced than the “interest graph” on Facebook, where the feedback loop is as simple as a list of “likes.” Instead, the behavior graph is built by tracking users’ on-site activity, which can include virtually anything a publisher wants to track, like clicking a link, reading an article, commenting, liking, replying to another comment, or sharing, for example. But it’s not limited to only content-producing websites. Retailers can use Social Fabric, too, to track activity related to purchases, recommendations, referrals and more. Even enterprise application makers could leverage Social Fabric to track internal activity, like a closed support ticket or users who added answers to a help site’s Q&A section. There are three main components to Social Fabric: activity streams, social notifications and alerts, and the ability to follow people and objects. The activity stream functions as sort of like a behaviorally-based, site specific version of Facebook’s News Feed. It shows users a stream of activity related their interests, including what your friends have been doing on the site – what they’ve been reading, commenting on, liking, etc. It can show you who has responded to a comment you left, or what users seem to like the same content as you do. The options, again, are up to the publishers themselves.  Badgeville is currently working on improving the filtering algorithms for this stream, to better highlight the activity that would be most interesting to a given user. Tasked with the algorithm improvements is Tim Piatenko, a developer who knows a little something about the matter, having previously worked on analytics at social gaming company Zynga. Another piece to the new Social Fabric system are the real-time alerts, which pop in (usually at the bottom of the page) to show you this same activity as it happens, while you’re browsing the website. The end result is a more engaging experience for users, while also providing the site’s publisher with a more detailed analysis of user behavior.  The third and final piece to Social Fabric is the “Follow” button which, unlike on social networks, can be applied to other things besides just people. Users can follow topics, videos, articles, or any object that can be tracked.  So why is a gamification company delving into social mechanics? Were badges not enough to fully engage users? As it turns out, it’s not a simple either-or situation. Adding social activity to the already-present game mechanics in Badgeville’s core product, helps to deliver better and more addictive on-site experiences, as the game-related activity becomes just another interest that can be tracked. Duggan says Badgeville already has half a dozen companies planning to implement Social Fabric over next week or two, so stay tuned. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past few years, longtime entrepreneurs Josh Felser and Dave Samuel have been investing in seed and early-stage startups under the name “Freestyle Capital”. Now that a few of the nearly 30 companies in their portfolio are starting to exit, they decided to make things more formal. Today at TechCrunch Disrupt, they’re officially unveiling Freestyle Capital — and they’re doing so with a new $27 million fund. Freestyle will operate out of San Francisco and will feature Felser and Samuel as the two founding partners. Additionally, they have entrepreneurs Joe Stump, Lane Becker, and David Bill on board as advisors. The plan is to use the new fund to continue their established investment trends, investing anywhere from $100,000 to $500,000 in young startups, typically. The two hope to differentiate themselves in the VC field because of their entrepreneurial experience. The pair co-founded two companies that both had successful exits (Crackle and Spinner.com). Just as important as the money will be the advice and guidance that Felser and Samuel offer startups. Of their 27 listed investments, three have already exited: About.me, BackType, and CoTweet. They’re also investors in Formspring, Get Satisfaction (which Becker co-founded), SimpleGeo (which Stump co-founded), Typekit, Yobongo, and others. Felser will be on stage as both a judge today and a panelist during a VC talk on Wednesday at Disrupt. Freestyle also has one new portfolio company launching at Disrupt in a couple days. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Start to finish party planning site Punchbowl is moving beyond just offering online invitations to the digital greeting card business. The company’s digital greeting cards allow you to send a thank you note, birthday card and more to contacts while still providing the look and feel of a traditional paper greeting card. Punchbowl’s Digital Greeting Cards come with folded designs, matching envelopes, realistic postmarks, and the mailopening experience. The cards can be personalized with accents such as envelope liners, custom postage, and rubber stamps. You can choose from hundreds of free designs and will be able to write messages in carious inks and fonts. As we’ve written in the past, Punchbowl’s platform allows users to create beautiful online invitations and track RSVPs. The startup also provides tools that let you find supplies, organize an after party and even set a date, via an algorithm that recommends the best date for your party. The site also allows you to set up gift registries, save-the-dates, message boards, integrate Google Maps’ to display the location, and share comments, photos, and videos. With a digital cards platform, Punchbowl’s real stationary-like technology is expanded to other greeting cards, which should be useful for the company’s million-plus users. Punchbowl also recently launched an iPhone app as well.  With the product expansion, Punchbowl has also unveiled DigitalGreetingCard.org, a new site that aims to declare independence from paper greeting cards  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FriendFinder Networks this morning announced the acquisition of BDM Global Ventures, the company behind daily deals business JigoCity, for a combination of stock and warrants, in a deal worth up to $65 million. JigoCity is a social commerce company that employs approximately 150 employees and powers daily deals in cities like Hong Kong and across countries like Singapore, Malaysia, Taiwan, China and South Korea but also Australia, Brazil and the United States. JigoCity is said to have generated revenue of approximately $600,000 in July 2011, and approximately $1.1 million last month. Its user base is currently over 1 million members strong. Following the acquisition, JigoCity will retain its brand identity. The company will also remain based in Los Angeles, California with its Asia headquarters in Shanghai, China. Last June, FriendFinder, which bills itself as an social networking and video sharing technology company but is basically a porn and dating site network operator, reported a $3.7 million loss for the first quarter since its (not so hot) May IPO (which raised $50 million). The company hopes JigoCity will benefit from its social networking platform, affiliate network and global reach, and FriendFinder posits that it could become an additional way for the company to monetize its foreign markets.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Lots of announcements today from Mindjet, which aims to help people work together more efficiently. The company this morning announced an upcoming cloud-based service dubbed Mindjet Connect, work management software that helps groups work together towards common goals by visualizing ideas and plans, manage and share files and provide a centralized hub for information, accessible at any time.  Mindjet Connect, which will be free of charge for a relatively limited edition (more on this below), will be available on September 22, 2011. Mindjet is also announcing the acquisition of Cohuman, a social task-based Web service that gives people the ability to better coordinate with colleagues on projects and tasks. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed.  According to CrunchBase, Cohuman was backed by nearly $1.5 million in early-stage funding from Jupiter Partners, Diamond II Investments and Stage One Capital. The company says Cohuman will continue to be actively developed as a standalone product. Later this year, a full Mindjet Connect integration will follow. Reading earlier blog posts, it seems to me like Cohuman’s only option that was left was to be acquired after failing to raise more funding.  Back to Mindjet Connect, which will come in the form of a complete online service and as an add-on to Mindjet desktop and mobile mapping clients.  The service will provide a web-based visual framework for  capturing and organizing ideas and information as well as cloud-based document management and multi-user collaboration capabilities so teams can work together in real-time. Mindjet Connect will be offered in three editions: Free, Business and SP (more on their availability, features and pricing later). Mindjet has a booth at our Disrupt conference held this week, where the company will be using information mapping to capture and display the Startup Battlefield in real-time to record all of this year’s best startup pitches. Go check it out if you’re attending! Finally, Mindjet has also announced the release of MindManager 2012 Professional for Windows, the latest version of its visual information software. Features include real-time co-editing, enhanced information maps and a new desktop interface, in addition to fresh brainstorming features. MindManager 2012 will integrate with Mindjet Connect to provide open sharing of MindManager maps with “anyone, anywhere, on any device”. MindManager 2012 will be available on September 22nd for the upgrade price of $129 and $399 for new customers. We’ll revisit once the product becomes available. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Not a day goes by that I don’t see one of the Twitter users I follow Tweet a request for an item, such as last-minute tickets; or post about a newly available item, such as an apartment for rent. As Twitter has become the de-facto broadcast network, part of the content being shared revolves around buying and selling items via users’ social graph. @Shopr, which was developed at the TechCrunch Disrupt Hackathon over the past 24 hours, is launching as a service that matches buyers and sellers on Twitter. It’s sort of like a Craigslist for Twitter. Basically, @shopr uses Gnip to mine the Twitter firehose for people selling things and looking to buy items. The service’s founders tell me that in their initial research currently around 7,000 Tweets per hour relate to commerce and people looking to buy and sell items (over 5,000 selling-related Tweets are sent every hour). Buyers can search on @shopr’s site, by specifying the item desired and their location. @shopr will match buyers with the appropriate Twitter users who have Tweeted about the item to sell. Buyers can also Tweet @ShoprBuy with what they want and where they want it and the service till Tweet back when they find the desired item. @shopr will also allow user to see pics of the item as well. If you’re a seller and you Tweet about posting an item, @shopr will surface posts in their search engine so long as they make it clear what they’re selling and where they’re selling it. Sellers can also tweet @ShoprSell with what they’re selling, location and an asking price, and @shopr will match this with a request from a buyer. And for an idea which was only born 24-hours ago, @shopr’s team has convinced a number of local retailers to participate in their selling service. A local San Francisco REI is listing several of their bikes, tents and backpacks (from the REI brand) with atShopr. San Francisco bookstore Dog Eared Books hast listed some of their inventory, Lost Weekend Video will be posting niche-genre movies and memorabilia, music store Aquarius Records are also putting some of their records on sale via the service. @shopr says that currently the most desired items posted on Twitter included bikes, books, apartments, tickets. What makes the service unique is that it allows sellers and buyers to expand beyond your Twitter social graph—which could be very useful for both buyers and local merchants and brands. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yesterday, we outlined a bit of what we’ve heard about Facebook’s upcoming f8 conference. One big launch will be their official foray into music. Today, we’ve heard more about that launch. One thing we’ve heard from a very good source is that a key aspect of the service will be “scrobbling”. The term, made popular by Last.fm, means that when you listen to a song, it gets sent to your profile without you have to do anything. I assume there will be a way to turn this off, or a way for you to selectively share songs, but this is a key to the service. Not that a post-music-to-profile feature should be surprising. Facebook’s core feature is the feed, and music will now make it even more robust. In fact, depending on how popular Facebook Music is, it could end up being one of the biggest sources of feed content. And I think it will be pretty popular based on the second bit of information we’ve heard. Facebook Music will also apparently offer content resolution between all the different music partners involved. This means that if you’re listening to Rdio and a track goes up on your profile, a MOG user can click on the track and still hear the exact same song in full. Essentially, you’ll only need to sign up for one of the major music services Facebook is launching with to be able to access most content (there undoubtedly will be some songs available on one service but not another, so it probably won’t be fully seamless, but I assume you’ll be able to hear previews regardless). This content resolution will likely be the most important aspect of Facebook Music. It turns Facebook into the great social music unifier. You can share songs without having to worry if your friends will be able to hear it or not based on what streaming service they use. It’s not clear what partners Facebook has gotten to agree to this unification beyond Rdio, MOG, and Spotify. It’s certainly possible that while other services will be a part of Facebook Music, those three will be the key ones. In terms of functionality, we’ve also heard that there will be a standard player that plays music without interruption from page to page as you browse Facebook. Om Malik previously reported on the persistent controls as well as a larger Music Dashboard area. Malik stated that the player would be at the bottom of Facebook, but we’ve heard that Facebook has been testing variations on this player, so it’s not yet clear where it will reside (top, bottom, etc). Update: Inside Facebook’s Josh Constine has an interesting thought: what if the desktop software team at Facebook was working on a scrobbler that could also work with iTunes to import listens? Those tracks could then by matched and played via Spotify, MOG, Rdio, etc, on Facebook Music itself. Constine notes that he doesn’t have any inside information on this, but he did outline that possibility following our post from May on Facebook’s Seattle-based desktop software team. Even if that isn’t a part of the initial roll-out, this makes a lot of sense down the road for Facebook Music. Or what about a Last.fm partnership for the service? And what would Apple think of all this? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile devices are shifting many individual computing behaviors, perhaps none more significant than how we search for and receive information. Right now, it’s moving at warp speed. In between the time I finish this draft and its posted, it’s entirely possible another company or service launches in this space. Every time we “swipe open” our mobile devices, we seek out dopamine hits from receiving new emails, texts, notifications, or other bits of digital media. A good chunk of this current mobile activity revolves around the personalized search and Q&A space, which leverages these behavior in new ways. By now, on traditional computers, we know how to find the information we seek, whether via sites like Google, Wikipedia, or through social networks. On mobile, however, our information needs and habits shift. On the go, we typically want smaller bits of information quicker, usually calibrated to our location. We are less likely to engage in longer discussion, and more likely to add questions in the hopes that machines, crowds, or some combination can produce relevant information. This shift has opened the floodgates of activity in the personalized search and Q&A space, with an impressive number of new applications vying for user attention in a crowded marketplace. Currently, “normals” with smartphones predominantly search for information on their mobile devices through Google, Wikipedia, or, on occasion, various social networks (either via dedicated applications and/or through the browser). Other apps exist for certain needs, such as Yelp, Foursquare, or AroundMe for location-specific information and reviews, Greplin and Doat for personal search, or services such as Loopt, Quora, and even Ask.com, which allow users to ask questions and (hopefully) receive good answers. This crowded landscape is about to get even more fragmented. In the last month, Ness Computing unveiled their beautifully designed iPhone app, which applies machine learning techniques to search, filter, and tune results for restaurants, with the added benefit of learning about your tastes from your social graph and more frequent use of the app. They will eventually move into other areas. Alfred’s iPhone app, by Clever Sense, is somewhat similar to Ness without the social inputs. Loqly’s iPhone app lets users browse nearby, scrapes reviews (and menus), and encourages users to ask and answer questions. Gootip encourages users to ask questions linked to a specific location with tie-ins back into various social networks, as does Locql, which I presume Hipster will do, too, which is somewhat tangential to CrowdBeacon’s approach of offering location-specific information. Localmind’s iPhone app takes things a step further, asking users to connect major social networks to aggregate potential questions around locations. (This is a very crowded space, so was really hard to include everyone or even come close.) In that app I happened to stumble into a Q&A thread where an employee from Quora had offered an answer. Which begs the question: How is Quora handling mobile? As I’ve speculated and as the company has hinted, it seems their iPhone app could be released soon. Mobile is a tricky play for Quora given how dense the site’s information is, though their mobile site has served users well so far. Their first version isn’t likely to include the ability to capture images and pose questions by picture. In the meantime, apps like Pupil offer a service whereby users can receive information about the pictures they upload, which is sort of what Peeqit will eventually do, too. Quora’s transition to mobile will meet similar challenges faced by other established Q&A sites with significant traffic, mainly Stack Overflow and Formspring, which each have a few third-party iPhone apps available but seemed to have paused on native solutions. One of the newest entrants, Jig by Tasty Labs, is set up as a lightweight Quora-style interface where users can post their “needs” and the community can make suggestions to “fill” those needs. They have hinted at a mobile app soon, too, perhaps one tied to SMS integration. The importance of asking and answering questions on the go isn’t lost on the incumbents. In December 2010, Twitter acquired Fluther with the hope of capturing Twitter’s question-related activity, though results haven’t emerged yet. Facebook has the infrastructure in place for a “Questions” feature, allowing users to distinguish posts between “updates” and “questions,” as well as a slightly hidden feature of asking specific friends to answer, all backed by a topic ontology that is almost as impressive as Quora’s. (It’s fair to wonder, also, if they’ll release a separate mobile app for “Questions” as it has for “Messages” and is poised to for pictures.) LinkedIn “Answers” generates decent traffic. Google purchased Aardvark last year for similar reasons, but recently announced it was killing the project, though it remains uncertain if they’ll bake some type of Q&A feature into future G+ versions. The competition in this space is incredible, reminiscent of the mobile photo-sharing wars of 2010. It’s safe to say that no one really knows what’s going to happen in Q&A, though it does seem really smart folks have decided that, perhaps one day (or sooner), Google’s traditional search on mobile may need to have more layers of signals in order to continue to provide relevant results for users on the go. Let’s take it a step further. What about next-generation technologies that can make the experience for the everyday mobile user more magical? Perhaps Apple will integrate technology from its acquisition of Siri and transform the iPhone? Perhaps another handset maker will nail a Nuance-like speak-to-text integration? Perhaps we can simply take a picture of where we are and receive tailored information immediately? Perhaps Google, after its acquisition of Motorola, will reign in Android and potentially even give away free handsets to ensure Android’s growth? Or, maybe it’s something as simple as Instagram or as wild as Color, which captures rich metadata around most of the iPhone’s sensors in order to implicitly paint a digital image of one’s physical and social whereabouts. The sheer level of competition is amazing. No doubt the folks who built Yahoo! Answers must be shaking their heads, especially since they’ve redesigned their own interface. And, in mobile, users’ search behaviors could change so dramatically if given the right tools, so much so that it could eventually threaten search incumbents’ traffic and brand. In particular, Google has trained us to search by keyword for over a decade now, but in real life, we aren’t wired to search this way as humans. Rather, we often search by posing questions to others around us, an activity that is inherently social, and are influenced by many social signals. And now that the social layer is permanent, and now that many apps can leverage a device’s location (and other) sensors, it’s possible to combine these variables and use a mix of crowdsourcing, curation, and machine learning to provide users with more robust and more relevant information. This paradigm poses a long-term threat to Google from many angles. To be clear, we are not there yet. Google search will dominate for some time. Google has a powerful, global brand, and now that they are moving to controlling more of the mobile stack with their purchase of Motorola, it’s not out of the question that they will do whatever they need to do to keep Android relevant, perhaps even giving away free phones in exchange for building and maintaining a G+ account? Whatever the outcomes may be today, mobile search and specifically the mobile Q&A market is wide open, up for grabs, and will continue to be an outpost in the multifront war Google is currently fighting. And while all of us keep asking questions, I wonder who or what will provide the answers: will it be humans, or machines, or a bit of both? Holy Q&A! And, now local. Next post will address this fragmentation. If we're all asking so many questions, who will provide the answers? — Semil (@semil) September 1, 2011  https://twitter.com/#!/cyrusradfar/status/109363946158432256 Photo credit: Brian Solis. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Jacob is a Venture Associate with Shasta Ventures. Prior to joining Shasta, Jacob worked at Microsoft’s BizSpark program and was the “business guy” at VentureBeat. Follow @jacob on Twitter here. It was an absolutely perfect day in Austin this past Wednesday, a temperate and breezy 89 degrees. The kind of day that seemed ripe with possibilities. Austin’s startup community gathered en masse at the University of Texas to hear the pitches from the five companies debuting out of Capital Factory, Austin’s summer startup accelerator. The vibe there was optimistic, and full of energy. The startup community in Austin is doing very well, if the event was any indication (in the afternoon session we also saw demos from 15 of the best and brightest in Austin overall). While comparatively small next to Silicon Valley or New York, the “Silicon Hills” have one of the most tightly-knit and collaborative of any I’ve experienced. Here is a quick look at each of the five 2011 Capital Factory companies. We saw very polished presentations and with a common theme of companies working on a really big opportunity, but focusing on initial verticals where they could show traction and make early progress. I think this is a (good) artifact of Austin’s pragmatism, and its strength in marketing, sales, and business development.  StoryMix Media was founded by husband and wife team Ariane and Mike Fisher, StoryMix Media finally makes all those short videos you shoot with your iPhone and Flip cameras useful. It’s kind of like Animoto for video. With a proprietary backend auto-edit-and-splicing technology, StoryMix enables you to easily create, publish, and share short videos with family, friends, and Facebook. Taking a Color-esque approach with their upcoming iPhone app, they make it simple for people at the same event, like a wedding, to take videos and upload them to a cloud-based dashboard which can be collaboratively organized into one cohesive video and published to Facebook to tag all your friends in their embarrassing table-dancing moments. The example videos we saw looked great. The company is focusing first on the weddings market, which is an obvious choice. The company told us that less than 1/3 of all weddings have videography, despite the untold billions that are otherwise spent on the occasion. Critique: While they’re focusing on targeting a single vertical, reaching profitability, and raising angel money to fuel customer acquisition marketing overall, this is a pure consumer play where you want the absolute absence of friction and you want to encourage off-label use cases and creativity. Their starting product is priced at $99. They should consider a freemium model to gain as many users as possible and later monetize for premium service (see: Animoto).  Helpjuice automatically updates your company’s help page. Founder Emil Hajiric is an 18 year old wunderkind who recently moved from Bosnia to Austin. Most startups are in the business of creating a solid company with stellar customer experience, and as such are tooled to respond quickly to product or technical support issues. However, the support team gets deluged 24/7 by common questions that could be easily answered on your company FAQ page. The solution: CC: the support email to Helpjuice and their “Juicers” will aggregate the questions, write the response for your FAQ page, send it to you for approval, and post it. This saves you precious time and money while keeping your users happy. Your FAQ is always updated, you build an evergreen asset, and you automate repetitive issues. Their search functionality against common FAQ questions seems particularly good, too. Critique: While Emil pitches Helpjuice as a software, the “Juicers” are humans who build out answers, so this sounds more like a tech-enabled service, bringing up concerns of cost, and scalability, as well as moat. Also, he’ll want to focus on strong competitive differentiation to stand out from customer support incumbents like Assist.ly, UserVoice and Get Satisfaction—right now Helpjuice risks being just a great feature best used in tandem with a bigger and more holistic platform.  SpeakerMix was founded by two veterans out of the nation’s largest speaker-sourcing agency, SpeakerMix is bringing the painful speaker sourcing process online. As an event planner for a national conference or a small company meeting, SpeakerMix makes it equally simple to connect with famous personalities or discover a niche speaker that will fit your tone, style, topic and budget. From the demo, SpeakerMix is like the Amazon-meets-Yelp-meets-OpenTable for speakers, focused around a Speaker profile page where planners can read reviews, comparable pricing, availability, and actually book the speakers, too. They have over 6,500 speakers currently listed, from @GaryVee to Bill Clinton and have handled over $1M in speaker bookings since launch earlier this year. But importantly, the system surfaces the long tail of the market and the speakers you don’t know that you don’t know, making matches that the company says every planner loves. Critique: The caveat here is that while it sounds like they’re making great speaker connections that might not otherwise be made, they will certainly get some pushback in being yet another intermediary in the process, which already includes the booking agent, talent manager, event planner, and potentially more. Yes, those people will welcome new business and search traffic, but if successful, SpeakerMix will start to have a lot of leverage and things might get political (see: Kayak). Is there enough food at the table to keep everyone fed?  From the former Chief Technologist of Frog Design, Mason Hale, comes SwimTopia, which is a cloud-based swim team management system, spawning from his own need to manage his children’s 200+ swim team. What was previously done on a single shared laptop in legacy Microsoft Access, is now done in an elegant web app Hale built that handles everything from registration, legal liability waivers, volunteer scheduling, equipment purchasing, payments and more. Coaches can easily identify which children aren’t yet registered for events and they can send friendly reminders to parents about the upcoming meets. While SwimTopia is for now focused on the $500M US youth swimming market, they have higher ambitions to expand the tool to all youth sports organizations in the US and grab hold of that bigger $5 billion market. With this beautifully designed solution, they’re off to a strong start. Critique: It’s a very large market, but getting traction in the long tail of local organizations is quite a challenge historically, and it can get very expensive, too. The targets are multifold—they have to sell the organizational leader(s) on the solution itself, but they also have to convince the hundreds of other constituents—parents, coaches, volunteers and more—to join in and actively use the product. User experience will be key, as will word of mouth. This will succeed only if it has bottom-up momentum, not just a top-down sales and business development mandate.  GroupCharger is a simple, yet powerful, way of increasing member engagement and contributions to organizations. Their first product, AlumniCharger, is already increasing alumni engagement and giving at University of Oklahoma, University of Texas Austin, and Texas A&M, with many more university alumni associations signed up and waiting to be let into the private beta. Alumni association engagement and contributions tend to be lower where less value is realized between individual alums. AlumniCharger democratizes the efficient CRM and community software solutions effectively used to build value and connect alums at schools like Harvard, Yale and MIT. It uses existing alumni databases to identify alums on social networks, makes introductions between them, and provides other recommendations for the alumni association to increase member engagement. GroupCharger is starting with the goal of bringing the 55,000 nationwide alumni associations online who spend an annual average of $125,000 on direct mail campaigns, but from there they see any membership-focused organization as greenfield opportunity. Critique: Although the value proposition is clear, universities and foundations are slow-moving organizations who don’t like to spend money. GroupCharger will want to focus on drawing a very clear ROI correlation demonstrating the direct increase of dollars and engagement thanks to their service—without such a clear cause and effect, it’s going to be hard to get past those lighthouse customers that were won mostly through existing relationships. The more forward-thinking groups might be more willing than most, but once the company works its way through the low-hanging fruit, this is a tough market to crack without data that wows. They may want to focus on being the direct connection between talent and buyer, and thus may end up in competition with their own suppliers anyway. They made brief mention of having an agency edition on the roadmap—that could be a nice middle ground, further embedding them in the ecosystem and enabling existing players, instead of threatening them. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When it comes to selling products on the Web, the more consumer reviews a product attracts, the more conversions and sales it sees as a result. This is why PowerReviews has built a social commerce network of more than 23 million reviews across 5,500 sites, including Staples.com, Gap.com, and ToysRUs.com. Today, PowerReviews is announcing the launch of two Facebook products that allow brands and retailers to leverage the social network as a platform for driving sales by making the process of online shopping and product discovery more social.  PowerReviews’ first new product, “Facebook Discovery”, enables consumers to engage in conversations around particular products, categories, and reviews and have them pushed directly into their newsfeed, hopefully creating the opportunity for viral marketing — and not wall spam. Users of Facebook Discovery can also follow particular reviewers of interest, so that all of their future reviews are published to their wall, or they can opt in to receive news of trending products in a daily product review, or ask friends friends what products they should choose via a question or poll. The startup’s second product launching today, “Facebook Community”, gives brands and retailers the opportunity to foster community among their customers — both on the product as well as their Facebook fan pages. In terms of brand marketing, Facebook Community allows brands to reward their ambassadors, while at the same time sharing feedback and advice among the community. The product also gives brands the ability to view the top 100 reviewers in order to identify their most active ambassadors and supporters. What’s more, consumers can connect their Facebook profiles to their reviews to create a suped up, uber profile designed to give identity — and added credibility — to their reviews for their friends and other shoppers. their Facebook profile to their reviews creating a rich onsite profile.  This increases the credibility of their reviews for other shoppers. As Erick wrote in out last coverage of PowerReviews, social sharing is a big assist for businesses, as each share is worth $15.72 in incremental sales.  PowerReviews has raised just over $37 million in outside investment to date, from a variety of VCs and angels, including Menlo Ventures, Lehman Brothers, and Draper Richards.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Joyent has revealed the winners of Node Knockout, the annual Node.js hacking competition it sponsors. This year’s hackathon, which encourages developers to build apps using the increasingly popular server-side JavaScript environment Node.js, included over 320 teams with more than 700 people competing. That’s a big jump from the 100 teams and 250 participants seen in 2010. The resulting winners are a diverse bunch, including everything from games and YouTube battle parties (we’ll explain…) to practical tools aiding in website design and game development. Here are this year year’s winners: Overall Winner & Solo Winner: Observer  Observer is tool designed to help you better understand your website visitors’ behavior by watching them navigate your site in real-time. You can see what the users are typing, what they’re clicking and even what keyboard shortcuts they’re using. You can also immediately start a chat session with a website visitor who appears to need assistance.  If you don’t have time to track all your users, you can store sessions for later playback. And all of this functionality can be implemented through a simple one-script installation. Overall Team Winner: Eight Bit Beats Eight Bit Beats is a collaborative, social beat and melody sequencer. Upon loading the site, you enter your name/handle, choose a sound board (DJ, Drum Kit, Special FX, etc.) and then start to add music to a collaborative track made with others.  Public Popularity Winner: Driv.in For even more fun, check out Driv.in, the YouTube battle party. The idea is that you create rooms on the site so that you and your friends can watch videos together in real-time. Now, where have we heard about something like that before? Yep, it’s pretty much the same thing as Chill, with the synchronous video watching, video DJ’ing, built-in chat and all. The only difference is that the “room” looks like a drive-in theater, not a movie theater as in Chill. Oh, and Drive.in has the added benefit of being able to throw tomatoes at the videos you hate. Take that, Rebecca Black!  Most Utility /Fun Winner: Doodle or Die  Doodle or Die is basically an iteration on Pictionary, where you are given things to draw and have to guess what others have drawn. The site is pretty basic, but the team is working on furthering the project as an iPad /iPhone/Android app that will be called Doodleblast.  Best Design Winner: ACROnode.com ACROnode is a slightly more intellectually challenging game than the above, and it’s loosely based on the original Acrophobia IRC game. Players are given a random acronym and are challenged to create “backronyms.” For example, when presented with “NBAM” you might play “Narwhal Bacons At Midnight.” Players score each other’s backronyms and receive points based on the number of votes, and for being the first to submit their backronym. It’s geeky, funny and, as indicated by the win, pretty to look at, too.  Most Innovation Winner: Blue GPU Lava  Returning to the more practical entries, Blue Lava is a small demo showing the node-webgl library. The entry is the open source library itself, not the visualization/demo. With this, developers can create advanced video games for modern platforms using Node.js. This library specifically targets the HP TouchPad. However, it can run on other platforms. Here’s the demo in action.   Most Complete Winner: Chess@home Chess@home is a project whose goal is to break the current world record for the largest Chess AI. It will use JavaScript and Node to organize the largest chess ever on a future “D-Day” to pit a Chess Grand Master against thousands of computers. The question is, can a JavaScript-based AI beat a Grand Master? Or will the human beat the machines? In the meantime, you can play against the networked machines to test your own skills. Those are all of this year’s winners, but if you’re curious about the other projects that emerged from the hackathon, you can check out the full list of entries here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ebates.com, the online cash back shopping website originally started in 1998, this morning announced the creation of a new company called Performance Marketing Brands (PMB), which will specialize in shopper loyalty programs. Furthermore, Ebates has acquired not one but two shopping sites, namely FatWallet.com and AnyCoupons.com. The company’s moves were funded by August Capital, Cannan Partners, Foundation Capital and Silicon Valley Bank.  Combining shopping and reward site FatWallet.com and coupon shopping site AnyCoupons.com with Ebates.com, PMB aims to establish one of the largest independent shopping rewards companies.  All three websites will, to be clear, continue to operate separately. The company posits that shoppers are expected to spend over $1.1 billion through PMB’s websites and shopping programs this year.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In the days of yore, travel guides were written by intrepid travelers who spent months scribbling in diaries and field journals, or by teams of adventurous souls exhaustively scrap booking their travel experiences into the Lonely Planets of the world. Over the last decade, however, the Web has produced an untold number of personal travel blogs, digital photo albums, community-built travel guides like Tripadvisor and Wikitravel, and cool travel resources like Gogobot.  Today, Jon Tirsen and Douwe Osinga, two ex-Googlers, are officially unveiling their new mobile travel guide Triposo, which doesn’t want to just throw out the old model, it wants to do what Google did for the world’s information: Aggregate that sucka and make it easily searchable. Simply put, Triposo is based on the simple idea that travel guides can be designed in the same way that Google based its aggregation and search on some kick ass algorithms. And a little bit of indexing and semantic icing to boot. To that end, travel guides like Triposo are possible today, because the content is there. Sites like Wikipedia, Wikitravel, and Openstreetmap have swaths of travel-related content, and Triposo wants to be the site that ranks that content so well you’ll never have to use another preachy, paper-based travel book. The environment will thank you. Thus, the Triposo algorithm takes travel information from seven of the biggest open source aggregators (and several closed resources as well) and serves its users with content that’s relevant for them. Without any human interference, Triposo COO Richard Osinga tells me, the startup produces travel guides, with information on sightseeing, nightlife and restaurants, all ordered by Triposo’s algorithm — and complete with an easy-to-use (and offline-enabled) map. That very offline functionality in and of itself makes Triposo’s free mobile apps worth downloading. Along with its web app, Triposo also offers 30 free destination guides for iOS using the same approach. The startup plans to release an iOS world guide, in which users can download a complete travel guide for any destination in the world, next month. Android users, on the other hand, can already find a world travel guide and guides for select cities here. Triposo has been polishing its travel content algorithms for over a year now, and launched a swath of city guides for iOS and Android to test the algorithmic waters and user response. So far, people are using the guides on average of 20 minutes per session — so far, so good. But the end goal for Triposo is really to hone its all-in-one world travel guides, so that users can pick a destination anywhere across the globe and easily find the best cities and destinations to visit.   But how does Triposo choose these recommended destinations? “One of the things we also use intensively for our ranking algorithms are photographs”, said Co-founder Douwe Osinga. “We have a collection of a few million travel photos geotagged — with time stamps. How many pictures are taken at a place, at what time, on what day: That all helps us decide how important a location is”. Of course, an algorithm-based company is only as good as its, well, algorithm. At the end of the day, travelers may prefer to receive personalized recommendations on destinations from their friends, or people they trust. (Or self-curated as one commenter pointed out.) And from this perspective, Triposo’s human-less recommendation platform may not suit everyone; but at the same time, it’s nice to have a free mobile app that works the same for everyone regardless. It may miss the mark for some, but the iPad app looks great, and so far, the algorithm hasn’t let me down. Amsterdam, here I come.  Along with platform unveiling, Triposo also told TechCrunch that it has raised $525,000 in seed financing from angel investors, including Chris Sacca, Taher Haveliwala, Google Wave Co-founder and Google Maps Lead Engineer Lars Rasmussen, and InterWest Partners. The founders said that they will use this new infusion of capital to continue optimizing its algorithm, working towards the goal of becoming the best possible web and mobile destination to answer: Where should I go next? The question, however, for Triposo, is what their revenue model will be when the money runs out. Premium features? Paid apps? More to come. For more on the interactive travel guides startup, check them out here. Let us know what you think. Travel content algorithms: Yay or nay? Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Web has been home to a fair number of questionable memes and websites over the years, really too many to mention here. One among them that you’re likely familiar with is “Hot Or Not”, the site that allows visitors to vote on photos of random people based on attractiveness. It’s not exactly high brow, but games like this have been around for years — in various incarnations. In the U.K., the theme gave rise to a popular reality TV show, called “Snog, Marry, Avoid” — the content of which you can probably guess based on the title. The show is also the inspiration for a young British startup, called Snog.com, that has seen some serious viral adoption in the U.K. over the last six months. The startup was founded by Jonny Teeling and Will Peirce, two recent grads from Leeds University, who set out to create a social discovery site that offered a new spin on the old model, plus a way for young people to break the ice and interact without the awkwardness of traditional dating sites. The idea was simple: Create a community that removes the daunting aspects of social interaction for young people, and make it easy for them to connect, meet, and maybe even snog. The co-founders rather obviously grabbed the concept behind Snog, Marry, and Avoid, brought it to an online audience (with enough to distinguish from the TV series as to avoid lawsuits), and, after an all-night coding session, the site went viral, recording 30,000 page views in the first two hours.  The story has a feel of Facebook’s early history, when Zuckerberg created Facemash, which attracted 22,000 views from Harvard students within an hour of being online. Of course, this is the problem that Snog.com has to confront: Facemash was only a precursor to the social network to rule them all, so the question becomes how to make sure Snog.com isn’t just a flash in the pan. The site’s early viral activity almost immediately overloaded the servers, leading to more than a few hours of downtime. But, based on the early interest, the founders were able to raise a “six-figure” investment from Kevin Ham, the investor and former “man who owns the Internet”. The investment led to a team of developers, Amazon hosting, and an advisor well familiar with building popular domains; and since the early stumble, Snog has continued to surge. The founders tell me that the site is currently attracting more than 1.5 million pageviews a day, and users are spending an average of 20 minutes on the site per visit. What’s more, the site has pulled in over 260 million pageviews in all since January.  Clearly, Snog.com has struck an addictive chord for British teenagers, but there are many examples of early successes in Web 2.0 that later find themselves hosting a plot in the Web’s graveyard. Snog therefore seems to be an interesting case study for how to build a social web business, maintain early interest, and make it something more than just another updated Hot or Not. (Granted, Hot or Not did sell for $20 million.) As of right now, Snog.com users can either choose to ‘Snog, Marry or Avoid’ based on another user’s photos and a small “about me” (or profile) section. The site also incorporates social elements, too, encouraging users to follow other users they like, write public notes, or send private messages. The average age on the site is about 17, which is certainly a coveted demographic for advertisers (Snog’s main monetization model at this point), but also somewhat limiting. The founders don’t want the site just to become a glorified chat room for teens, it wants to create a social discovery platform — not another social network.   For starters, Snog has just released an iPhone app that offers users a gallery in which they can see top members and which of their friends are currently online, play with their user profiles, check their responses, send private messages, as well as a “Shuffle” setting that allows them to quickly browse  — and, well, shuffle — through profiles. Mobile is certainly an important piece of the puzzle, but it’s really an added feature, what’s more important is baking more significant components into the site’s structure that make it a social discovery platform based on more than just a user’s profile pic and silly bio.  Next, Snog plans to add more enhanced location features (for both web and mobile) that allow users to connect based on proximity, and hopefully take online flirting and connecting offline. Beyond that, the founders want to integrate users’ interest graphs into the site, allowing users to search for people with similar interests and demographics. The founders also plan to add “like, love, dislike” buttons across the site, which visitors can use to vote on statuses, specific photos, movies, books, cities, brands, etc. Snog is an interesting site, to be sure, and the founders clearly have a vision to transform their site a community platform — not to mention that they want to make “snog” an international word. There’s potential for both, especially for the latter (thanks to Harry Potter), but other young web entrepreneurs would be smart to pay attention to what happens to the site over the next year — it should be an interesting litmus. What do you think? Snog, marry, or avoid? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Powerinbox, the new email platform that lets you run apps for Facebook, Twitter, and Groupon inside your inbox has today added support for Google+. Despite not having access to an official Google+ API (application programming interface), the company was able to analyze the Google+ protocol by tracking the requests between the official Google+ client and server. Powerinbox then created its own internal API and built its Google+ client app on top of it. Now, when you receive a Google+ notification via email, you can use the Powerinbox app to immediately add that person to one of your Google+ Circles. Support for commenting and status updates is coming next.  In case you’re not familiar with Powerinbox, it’s one of the most practical applications I’ve come across in recent months. The idea behind the startup is to innovate on top of email by augmenting the messages sent to you by various services, essentially turning your emails into apps. These apps run within the body of your email message by way of a downloadable Web browser extension. Currently, Powerinbox supports Gmail, Hotmail and Yahoo mail, but it plans to add support for Outlook soon. So, for example, when you receive a message that someone followed you on Twitter, you can use the Powerinbox app to see their tweets, follow them back, send them an @reply or direct message. For Facebook notifications, you can view the photos and posts from your friends and comment back, all without having to visit Facebook.com.  Groupon emails display a real-time counter indicating how much time the deal has left, how many people bought the deal and whether the deal has tipped.  It’s the sort of functionality that, had email been invented today, you would expect it to include. In the future, Powerinbox plans on adding support for more apps, including Dropbox, Netflix, eBay, LinkedIn, airlines, news and even games. (Need to water those crops again? Have at it!) Given the more established nature of these other services, we wondered why Powerinbox moved to support Google+, a brand-new social network which doesn’t even have an API for developers yet, unless you’re one of the anointed few. Explains Founder and CEO Matt Thazhmon, the answer is simple: it’s what people wanted. According to the results of the survey the company was running on its website, requests for Google+ beat out LinkedIn, YouTube, Flickr, PayPal and half a dozen other services.  Powerinbox raised $1.1 million last month, mostly from AngelList investors, including  Atlas Venture (Jeff Fagnan), Longworth Ventures (Jim Savage), Correlation Ventures (Trevor Kienzle), and angels Alan Phillips (where.com), Chris Lynch (Vertica), Joe Caruso (Bantam Group), Leslie Murdock (MurdockMartell), Mark Rose (SpareChange), Mike Santullo (RocketMail) and others. The additional funds will be used to expand the platform and hire engineers. The company’s addressable market is worth noting too: 4 billion email users by 2014. That alone is reason enough to try to improve the email experience. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SOS Online Backup, a company that markets cloud-based data backup and protection solutions, has raised $3 million in Series A funding from Splashpond Investors. The financing round brings the total of capital raised by the company, which is obviously operating in a saturated market of online backup solutions, to $10 million since its inception in 2006. SOS Online Backup, which competes with the likes of Carbonite, Mozy and Nomadesk, says it currently boasts more than 500,000 users. The capital injection will serve to support the roll-out of several new products and cloud-based data backup solutions for a wide range of devices and platforms, the company says. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Payvment, a startup that allows anyone to create and operate a retail storefront on Facebook, is releasing a new version of its social commerce platform that aims to meet needs of larger retailers, brands and agencies.   Payvment’s Facebook App, which launched in November of 2009,  lets anyone create a retail store on the social network. The app lets you set up products, categories of products (i.e. shoes, T-shirts, sweaters), import photos, list terms of service and shipping options and more. Once you set up your online shop on Facebook, it will show up in a separate tab on your profile or page under “storefront”. The company also offers a virtual shopping mall of all of its storefronts on Facebook. The new paid versions, Payvment Premium and Payvment Platinum, inclue advanced analytics on Likes, comments and Tweets on a product-by-product basis. Retailers can also create an automated and product-specific social promotion, allowing users to schedule posts to their Wall and Twitter feeds to promote key products and deals. And sellers will also be able to run promotions on individual products using coupon codes.  Premium versions also support multiple storefronts and administrators from a single dashboard. Payvment Premium, which includes all of the existing features of Payvment’s free application as several new features listed above, will be available for $29.95 per month or $299.95 yearly. Payvment Platinum is a customized version of the e-commerce platform that includes an unlimited number of storefronts, account administrators, 1:1 training and priority customer support.  Payvment now has over 60,000 active storefronts using the free version of its social platform. The company is now beginning to monetize so it should be interesting to see how much traction the startuo can get among paid customers. As Facebook continues to evolve as a destination for e-commerce, more retailers are looking for ways to sell their products on the social network. Of course, Facebook, which is reportedly ramping up e-commerce initiatives, could also be playing in the space soon.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’ve heard it once, you’ve heard it thousands of times: Children are the future. Both literally and figuratively, that’s a hard one to debate. Now then, if adults are adopting digital technologies at an astounding rate, to better their own lives, connect, and learn, why not the world’s whippersnappers? Some might balk at the sight of a five-year-old on an iPhone, but when digital devices and technology become means not just to make money off of young people through games or carrier contracts, but tools of early education, the critics quiet down significantly. We’ve covered a few cool young startups, like Motion Math and Launchpad Toys, which are mixing some serious learning with more than an ounce of fun — in an effort to make mobile devices educational resources for kids.  Today, Fingerprint, a new startup based in San Francisco, is joining in on the wave of mobile education for kids — with a round of early funding and a team well-versed in children’s entertainment and education to boot. In an effort to build a network of learning and entertainment apps for kids, the startup is today announcing that it has raised $1.4 million in seed funding from K2MediaLabs, THQ, Reed Elsevier Ventures, and Suffolk Ventures. As to its team, Fingerprint was co-founded by CEO Nancy MacIntyre, who was executive vice president of product and marketing at LeapFrog Enterprises, and Kevin Wendle and Daniel Klaus of K2Media Labs. It also has Heather Regan (the former COO of Everloop), CTO Brad Edelman, who was previously the founder and CTO of PlayFirst, as well as Darren Atherton on board, who was formerly Head of Production and Online at LucasArts and previously worked at both EA and Mattel. According to Fingerprint’s website, the team collectively generated over $4 billion in revenue, 500 million downloads, 200 video games, 100 interactive books, and 12 technology patents. Even if these numbers are bloated, the team is familiar with the space to be sure. But, so what? As the market for education and gaming apps for kids grows, there are still plenty of challenges to be faced; namely, parents have a tough time finding appropriate (and truly educational) content in overloaded app stores, let alone staying engaged in their kids’ digital play experience once they find suitable apps. Within a few years, millions of kids will be using Android and iOS devices, so Fingerprint is aiming to make sure that kids from ages three to eight — and their parents — are provided with a shared fun and educational experience, while delivering a platform that allows developers to showcase clean, well-designed apps. To do this, Fingerprint will be launching applications that include features that enable social sharing and communication between kids and adults, gameplay snapshots for parents, a recommendation engine for new games based on users’ patterns of play and progress, as well as a virtual reward system that encourages kids and parents to stay engaged. Of course, to build a truly robust and meaningful platform, Fingerprint needs to offer compelling business opportunities for developers — so the startup has created a distribution network for third-party developers that enables them to design and deploy their games so that they can easily be discovered, downloaded, and shared by Fingerprint users. To this end, the team says that it will allow developers to “fingerprint” their games, which means that they’ll be able to easily tap into sharing and engagement features that expose their apps to new audiences and reduce customer acquisition and support infrastructure costs. Additionally, the Fingerprint CEO said, developers will be able to integrate the platform’s tracking tool that collects data so that parents can see what their child is learning and how they’re progressing through the apps — as well as recommending what they should play next. To kick things off, starting in October, Fingerprint will be launching four flagship applications, which users can get an early taste of here, whereafter it will begin working with third-party app developers to design and distribute new titles. Touch devices present an incredible educational opportunity for young people (hell, PCWorld even called the iPad the Toy of the Year in 2010), and while there are some interesting startups out there making headway, the market remains largely untapped.  It’s not a zero sum game, and educational app developers have the opportunity to create cross-pollinating and collaborative communities (or networks) of apps that provide distribution and innovation opportunities for developers, as well as amazing resources for kids. That’s what Fingerprint seems to be doing: Going after high end content that brings education to kids, but also making sure that developers are along for the ride. It’s a smart play, and it will be interesting to see how Fingerprint positions itself going forward. More to come, to be sure. For more, check out Fingerprint at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startup accelerator DreamIt Ventures is introducing its Fall 2011 Philadelphia class today, which includes five minority-owned companies selected in collaboration with Comcast Ventures. In May, DreamIt and Comcast teamed up to provided seed funding, training and mentoring to minority-led startups, starting with DreamIt’s fall program. The current class includes students and alumni from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Princeton, Duke, Stanford, Harvard, Yale, Columbia and MIT. Startup founders have past work experience at Google, Yahoo, Intel, Goldman Sachs and J.P. Morgan. Five of the companies were selected together by DreamIt and Comcast Ventures, the venture capital affiliate of Comcast Corporation, as part of its Minority Entrepreneur Accelerator Program (MEAP). This program provides an extra $350,000 on top of the funding DreamIt offers for minority-led startups. The current group includes owners who are African-American, Asian, Hispanic and Indian. MEAP is the first initiative from the $20 million fund created by Comcast as a part of the acquisition of NBC Universal. The fund will also be used to invest in other minority-led startups and initiatives outside of DreamIt in the future. The 15 startups in DreamIt’s new fall class include the following companies (note, links were provided when available): Latest headlines delivered to you daily Platfora, a startup focused on bringing businesses intelligence from big data, raised $5.7 million in Series A funding   led by Andreessen Horowitz with intelligence technology company In-Q-Tel participating. Andreessen Horowitz General Partner Scott Weiss is joining the board as part of the investment. Ben Werther, founder and CEO of Platfora, explains that   Hadoop one of the best options for businesses that manage huge amounts of data because it is low cost and provides a massively scalable data infrastructure. But, he explains that it lacks the interactivity, intelligence and sophisticated reporting capabilities needed by business users. Basically, there needs to be a layer that helps retrieve intelligence and analytics from this data. For background, Hadoop is a Java software framework born out of an open-source implementation of Google’s published computing infrastructure which is fostered within the Apache Software Foundation. Hadoop supports distributed applications running on large clusters of commodity computers processing enormous amounts of data. For example, Facebook uses Hadoop. Platfora works with existing Hadoop clusters, including Cloudera, MapR, and Amazon EMR, among others, and automatically turns these huge amounts of data into dimensional and predictive dashboards, reports and insights. The company’s server architecture enables sub-second report delivery, analytics overlay, and drill down performance. Platfora eliminates the need for traditional data warehouses, ETL tools and the legacy BI products of the past. The company, whose product will go to market in 2012, believes that it can serve a number of companies in industries including web, advertising, finance, telecommunications, logistics and federal intelligence. Weiss says that Andreessen Horowitz has been sitting on sidelines of making a big investment in Hadoop for some time now. He says that it has been hard to find something valuable to help make Apache Hadoop useful and usable. “This is our big bet on Hadoop, ” says Weiss. Any company that is taking in large amount of data, whether that be from a network, email, or other infrastructure, gaining intelligence from this big data is key. Weiss also cites the strength Werther as a key factor to the investment. He was a former product head of Greenplum, an analytical database company acquired by EMC. The venture firm has been generally bullish on big data so the investment in a company that helps make sense of big data isn’t surprising. Andreessen Horowitz led a $25 million round in database company Factual last year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily APIs are hot. Twitter attracts 15 billion API calls per day, and Saleforce.com receives 50 percent of its traffic through its API, to site a few big name examples. So here’s a simple thought: If everyone and their mother is beginning to take advantage of APIs, why not create a marketplace where developers can easily discover, distribute, and consume all things API? This was the thinking employed by a young Italian startup (transplanted to San Francisco) named Mashape. As we wrote in our original profile of the startup in June, simply put: Mashape wants to be a little bit Etsy, a little bit Github by offering a unified, all-in-one marketplace where users can find, sell, distribute, and hack on APIs.  When the startup arrived in the U.S. in 2009, it quickly raised $100K from several angels and VCs. And now more investors are buying, and their names are familiar in the world of tech investing. The company announced yesterday that it has raised $1.5 million in seed funding led by New Enterprise Associates, with participation from Index Ventures, Charles River Ventures, Ignition Partners, and Eric Schmidt’s Innovation Endeavors. Several angels also contributed to the round, including Amazon President and CEO Jeff Bezos. It’s an impressive list of investors, especially considering the fact that Mashape launched in private beta last June and has still yet to officially launch publicly. Mashape CEO Augusto Marietti also tells me that, prior to its seed round, the startup had received acquisition offers from both a “big public company” as well as a “medium size” company (of around 200 employees). The founders turned down both offers, and thus were not willing to share names, in pursuit of raising venture and angel investment to allow it to continue to operate as an independent entity. What’s more, Marietti said that the startup has already begun to generate revenue, and in three months has jumped from 110 APIs to nearly 200 — both public and private.  What do I mean by public and private — and where is that revenue coming from? The APIs listed on Mashape are both free and for charge, hence the public and private, and Mashape’s incipient monetization strategy. But the company also wants to help developers monetize, too. Mashape offers a simple (and free) tool that enables users to monetize JSON APIs, for example, by allowing them to list an API and then set up billing with a single click to choose monthly charges, API call limits, and give a price per additional call.  “If we take a look into those startups that have more than 30 people”, Marietti said, “we notice that most of them are hiring two new positions: API evangelists and API engineers. These positions would never have existed 3 years ago. A new market is on its way”. APIs are without a doubt maturing, but Mashape also wants its marketplace to take advantage of the other maturing facets of Web 2.0, 3.0, or wherever the Thought Leaders want to put us. Thus, Mashape is building a social layer on top of its APIs, in order to address the discoverability and trust issue inherent to a growing API marketplace, allowing users to see what their friends are using. Bigger sites like Twitter haven’t yet bought on to Mashape, and granted the startup is playing in a market made of enterprise solutions, but with these features in place, the startup is poised to take advantage of a community built from startups, SMBs, to the big guys — whenever they finally decide to take the bait. In another newsworthy note for startups and developers: Mashape announced today via its blog that it will be a partner in Rapleaf’s new “Personalization Fund”, a $1 million fund “dedicated to supporting developers creating projects around data and personalization”. Mashape community members will receive priority access to Rapleaf’s fund resources, according to Marietti. As VentureBeat initially reported, Rapleaf is looking to fund between 50 to 100 startups with its new initiative, which offers $15K in cash grants, free data, and services. Startups chosen to participate will receive access to Rapleaf’s network of partners, its customers, and joint marketing opportunities, the company told VB.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social video advertising startup Sharethrough is debuting ‘Sharethrough HQ,’ an analytics dashboard designed specifically for social video campaigns.   Sharethrough’s ad network basically takes video advertisement from brands and helps agencies and marketers distribute these videos through social ad formats. For example, Sharethrough allow you to Tweet a video, Share the content on Facebook, and more from within the ad unit. The startup has run campaigns on publisher sites behalf of a number of high-profile brands, including Sony, Microsoft, General Motors, Victoria’s Secret, Nestle and LEGO. Sharethrough HQ gives media agencies and brand advertisers the ability to track the performance of their online video content, gain insight into the media generated for their campaigns and make real-time campaign optimization decisions from a single interface.   Marketers can access video viewership metrics such as average view length, Sharethrough rates, social engagement metrics.  Sharethrough HQ also includes a real-time social activity feed that aggregates all of the online conversation around each video across multiple social media platforms, including Facebook and Twitter.   And the startup continues to grow as more brands look to advertise through video. Sharethrough says its average campaign size has nearly tripled year-over-year and overall company revenue has grown by over 100 percent year-over-year. According to comScore, the video advertising platform’s current U.S. reach at 97.5 million viewers.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Taptu, a social media and social search company, announced today its plans to expand beyond its current lineup of mobile apps in order to include a new, white label offering called Tapform. As the name implies, Tapform is a platform for publishers, developers and hardware manufacturers interested in building their own social news aggregator. The launch will be made possible by way of Taptu’s newly-received $3.5 million in Series B funding from U.K.-based DFJ Esprit and French firm Sofinnova. Although social news is clearly a crowded space at the moment (see Flipboard, Zite, AOL Editions, Tweetmag, Pulse, etc.), Taptu offers a unique feature it calls “DJ’ing” the news. This refers to Taptu’s ability to let its users mix streams from various media sources like blogs, Twitter, RSS feeds and more. Taptu itself also offers 12,500 streams built by its own editorial team, for those who aren’t as interested in the hands-on content creation business as they are in the consumption. And the majority aren’t – only 10% of Taptu’s customers use the DJ feature. Says Taptu CEO Mitch Lazar, the key difference between his company’s product and competitors is the search technology that powers the app – a technology that has been around for over 5 years. This core engine is what Taptu is all about. It was only recently put into the new interface – the mobile and tablet offerings you see today. The repositioning began in May 2010, with a relaunch in November and then iPad and Android tablet apps following this April and May, respectively. Although Taptu won’t disclose the number of installs it has, it’s happy to talk growth and engagement numbers. Specifically, 60% of the company’s growth has come since the launch of the tablet apps in April (iPad) and May (Android). Also, 50% of its customers have now become monthly users. And Android users are more engaged than those on iOS, comprising 60% of the traffic, with 2.5 visits per day and reading 19 stories. iOS users visit twice per day and read 12.5 stories. Prior to this announcement, Taptu has been working on deals to get its app pre-installed on tablets.  We should see the first results of those deals sometime around the holidays, on the Android platform. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FullContact, a startup that just ‘graduated’ from business accelerator TechStars, has raised $1.5 million in Series A funding from 500 Startups, Tango / High Country Venture, BulletTime Ventures, SK Ventures, Zelkova Ventures and angel investors. FullContact provides an API that software developers can use inside their services and applications to provide users complete and up-to-date contact information. Basically, FullContact lets developers tap into its database of more than 100 million contact records to turn partial, out-of-date contact records into complete contact records.  Information includes phone numbers, email addresses, postal addresses, name, title, company, social profile URLs, an image, birthday, instant messenger handles, and more. Sound a little creepy? It depends on how you look at it. The startup employs a crowdsourcing model to update the contact information, only shares contact information that’s publicly available on the Web (social networks, other APIs etc.), and allows any software application to leverage their contact database via their API. Currently, over 750 developers use their API. The startup says its technology can, however, not be used with advertising networks, ad exchanges or services that tie cookies to contact data. FullContact was founded by Bart Lorang, Travis Todd, and Dan Lynn in 2010. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInPersonal Styling And Retail Platform For Men Trunk Club Raises $11 MillionPersonal styling and retail platform Trunk Club has raised $11 million in Series funding led by U.S. Venture Partners with Greycroft Partners, Apex Venture Partners, and Anthos Capital also participating in the round. As we wrote in our previous coverage on Trunk Club, the startup pivoted from being a way that men could hire their own personal shopper via Skype video sessions to building a group of professional stylists on staff who coordinate with clients via phone and email, and actually purchase goods for clients from retailers.  A gentlemen can sign up via the website, pick preselected looks, and answer a small questionnaire with questions like “where do you shop right now?,” “what’s your favorite item in your closet,” sizes, price and color preferences and more. A stylist will then call/contact the customers via their preferred method of communication. Once the stylist gets an idea of the customer’s style, he or she will send a “trunk,” of clothes and ship out via Fedex a handpicked collection of shoes, pants, shirts, and more.  Once the customer receives the order, he can try on the items and send back the clothes he doesn’t like  in a prepackaged box. The customer is only charged for the clothes he keeps and isn’t charged for any shipping costs. Outside of of Illinois, customers don’t pay sales tax either. Trunk Club, which has over 3,500 active clients, buys clothing at wholesale and sells it at a normal retail markup. There are no sales/discounts on clothes and Trunk Club stocks its own inventory. Customers don’t pay anything extra for them as they would in a fancy department store. Trunk Club’s CEO Brian Spaly has considerable experience in the online retail world. You may remember Spaly from Bonobos, a recently-funded startup that makes custom-fit pants for men.  Spaly and Andy Dunn founded Bonobos together and parted ways due to differences in vision.  The company is also launching a brand new customer center where users can now request additional orders on-demand based on current needs, provide detailed feedback on items in previous orders, and manage their clothing preferences in an interface. The new feature will also utilize data around each customer’s unique preferences to provide targeted recommendations with every order. Spaly says he is trying to bring the Netflix model of contextual suggestions to clothing. The new funding will be used for additional hiring marketing, and further expansion.  In the end, Spaly explains “Trunk Club about helping guys never have to go to the mall again.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve spent the past couple of days in London getting caught up in the Seedcamp Week craziness, meeting some of Europe’s finest entrepreneurs and investors. Me and Mike Butcher will soon post a round-up of this year’s finalists (and highlight a few interesting ones separately), but first, Seedcamp has some – actually, a lot of – news of its own to announce today. The organization, which combines an early-stage seed investment fund with a world-class mentoring program for European entrepreneurs, is expanding by striking a number of international partnerships, setting up new events (Seedhack), establishing an ‘experts-in-residence’ program and an impressive advisory board, raising more funding from a number of new strategic investors and strengthening its offering to fledgling companies with the help of several corporate sponsors. Where to begin?  About a year ago, Seedcamp raised €3 million euros in funding. Today, the organization is announcing that €2 million more has been invested in the seed fund by a number of strategic investors, including ACT Venture Capital, Bertelsmann Digital Media Investments, GIMV, Reed Elsevier Ventures, Samos and HENQ. Individual investors such as former Google M&A exec Anil Hansjee and John Pfeffer are also participating. Seedcamp’s fund is now €5 million euros, twice as much as its initial fund. Existing investors include Index Ventures, Atlas Venture, NESTA, Eden Ventures and plenty of others. Seedcamp says entrepreneurs have been asking for a lot of things from the organization and its network of mentors, but one recurring theme was more ways to enter the U.S. market and establish partnerships with American companies. Meeting those needs, Seedcamp is today announcing that they’ve formed partnerships with the likes of 500 Startups, Dave McClure’s investment firm, and AngelList, a network that connects angel investors with promising entrepreneurs. “We’ve already invested in 3 Seedcamp companies, and we keep coming back for more,” said McClure. “Our experience bringing international startups to the US is a great match for Seedcamp startups, by helping them improve their product and marketing efforts, as well as making introductions to Silicon Valley mentors and platform companies such as Facebook, Twitter, Google, YouTube and PayPal.” 500 Startups has indeed invested in 3 Seedcamp startups (ERPLY, Brainient and LOOKK) but I’ve also heard one of the companies in this year’s batch has closed a financing deal with the firm. The partnership with AngelList strengthens Seedcamp’s own, similar initiative (dubbed Seedsummit – read more about it here) and Seedcamp is exploring other partnerships in the United States. Seedcamp is also teaming up with startup events all over Europe that will feed into the regional Seedcamp events, in order to tie the European startup ecosystem a little tighter. Winners from events put on by the likes of Arctic Startups (Scandinavia), Garage48 (Baltics), TISEE (Eastern Europe) and eFestival + Social Media Week (Italy) will receive a spot in the relevant regional Mini Seedcamp.  We’re not finished yet. Seedcamp is also slated to announce today that they’re establishing an experts-in-residence program, which is essentially a way to match up Seedcamp startups with relevant advisors who want to do more than hold a one-time mentoring session. Seedcamp will provide guidance to both the startups and experts on how to setup an ‘official’ advisor role and any documents they will need to formalize such a relationship. Seedcamp has also set up an advisory board of its own, formalizing many relationships it’s long had with a number of people with various key skills. The initial list of its Advisory Board members for 2011-2012 includes people like Anil Hansjee (ex-Google M&A exec and angel investor), Bindi Karia (VC and Emerging Business Lead at Microsoft), Bryce Roberts (investor with OATV), Christian Hernandez (Director of Platform Partnerships at Facebook), Dave McClure, Jeff Clavier (investor at SoftTech VC), David Yu (until recently CEO of Betfair), Gustav Soderstrom (Head of Product at Spotify), Henri Moissinac (Head of Mobile at Facebook) and many more. Finally, Seedcamp is also strengthening its offering to startups by increasing the value of additional services it can offer via its 34 corporate sponsors (Facebook, Google, Qualcomm, Amazon and others) beyond the capital injection and access to its mentor network. Sponsors are putting up around £50,000 in value for solutions ranging from infrastructure services to analytics, advertising, marketing and other services. A lot of news to digest, but in essence: great news for both Seedcamp and European startups. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past few months, few things on the web have been hotter than Turntable.fm. The Stickybits pivot got so hot, so fast, that a “trough of disillusionment” was inevitable — and we’ve probably been seeing that the past couple of weeks. But something is coming very shortly that should supercharge the service once again: an iPhone app. Yes, it was both obvious and inevitable that Turntable.fm would go mobile. But we’ve managed to obtain some details — and most importantly, screenshots. We’re told that the company is hoping to release the app next week. It has been in testing with a few dozen people for the past few weeks, and is solid on WiFi connections, but less so over 3G, we’re told. That’s probably the last issue they have to address given the screenshots below — it looks very polished. We’re told it was built by one teenage iOS developer. As you can see, they’ve done a great job moving the look and feel of the app over to mobile. People who have used the app say it’s “awesome”. Like the site, the app has deep Facebook integration, and we assume you still need to know a Facebook friend with access in order to use it yourself. No word on an Android app at this point. Speaking of Facebook and Turntable.fm, there are also whispers that the music service will be a part of the social network’s upcoming music announcement, likely taking place at f8 in a few weeks. Hopefully Turntable.fm’s Billy Chasen and Seth Goldstein will have more to share at Disrupt next week — they’ll both be there. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Evri, the realtime content discovery engine, acquired Radar Networks early last year, incorporating the startup’s semantic indexing technology into its products. The move laid the groundwork for Evri’s shift into the mobile space, as it has since used its realtime semantic matching algorithms to begin delivering news in targeted categories and the Twine team to expand into mobile. Last year, the startup launched EvriThing Tech to allow readers to create and add their own channels on any tech topics, as well as those from predefined topics. (Similar to what FLUD, and others are doing in the mobile content space.) Today, Evri is expanding its mobile functionality, launching a suite of sports applications for iOS and Android devices, called SportStream, that will be powered by its eponymous platform. With the NFL season looming, Evri is kicking off its suite of sports apps with SportStream Football, an app that looks to provide readers with realtime push notifications and in-game commentary through social channels — to make your Sunday viewing experience more interactive and a little more Web 2.0.   With SportStream Football, Evri is looking to provide an immersive experience for fans that allows them access to realtime news content from thousands of sources, integrating personalized and up-to-date information from fans’ social feeds, enabling readers to live tweet highlights from games as they happen. Viewers can see in-game score updates and play-by-play summaries, with personalization options for specific teams, like key injury and trade news, for example.  Just as Taptu has created a fantasy football stream for iPad users, Evri is looking to have its targeted and personalized content stream become a great resource not only for fans but for fantasy football players as well. The objective here, says Evri CEO Will Hunsinger, is not to “out-ESPN ESPN”, but to take advantage of where ESPN’s realtime sports coverage lacks. Not only by scouring the web for information from bloggers and other sports content outside of ESPN’s realm, but by allowing fans of, say, Georgetown sports, to create targeted news feeds for their alma mater’s teams. While ESPN is obviously a robust content source (really, the death star of sports content), there’s plenty of room here for startups to improve on the sports content reading and viewing experience. With Evri’s well-honed semantic indexing data, the SportStream apps are a great resource for personalized sports info. Evri is smart to go after these enthusiastic, underserved niches. Or, even if sports content isn’t exactly sparse, to give sports fans an easier and less “noisy” reading experience, with realtime functionality, adds weight to the startup’s value proposition. Yes, Pulse recently struck a deal with ESPN, and Taptu is offering a great tablet app, but there’s plenty of room in the market, and Evri’s approach to fan engagement via the social graph and realtime tweeting, is a good start. We’ll be looking forward to the startup’s next moves. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, FLUD, the social news reader that allows users to read, bookmark, and share personalized news, is announcing an agreement to offer premium content in its mobile applications from six AOL brands, including The Huffington Post, TechCrunch, Engadget, The Unofficial Apple Weblog, Spinner, and Joystiq. (Disclosure: TechCrunch is owned by Aol.)  When we last covered the startup, it had just raised $1 million from a host of angels and VCs, including Cleveland Cavaliers Owner Dan Gilbert and ePrize Founder Josh Linkner, through their new venture fund Detroit Venture Partners as well as Ludlow Ventures and Behance Founder Scott Belsky. At the time, FLUD Founder and CEO Bobby Ghoshal told us that, though the app aggregates news feeds and thus nominally competes with news apps like Flipboard and Pulse, FLUD has been working towards the goal of reducing reliance on RSS by building content partnerships with top publishers and news networks.  According to Ghoshal, with this new partnership established, FLUD users will now have access to full content from AOL in FLUD’s apps with a clean text view, quick loading time and access to articles as soon as they are published.  For FLUD to compete with its big-time rivals, another important goal has been to offer a service that is both device and platform agnostic. While the app has been available on iOS since earlier this year, FLUD recently released its first Android app. Just as with its iOS applications, when a user first loads FLUD, the app automatically aggregates news from a wide variety of popular news websites, which users can then add to by choosing from an array of websites by name, topic or URL, or by adding RSS feeds from Google Reader. FLUD is going for a more attractive and seamless news reading experience, and its value proposition is that readers can add as many feeds as they like, populating the app’s clean template through featured feeds or a simple keyword search, automatically creating a clean, magazine-like page with news from your chosen site. If you have a handful of publications that you peruse daily, FLUD is a great option, as it does a great job of eliminating the feed mish-mash inherent to the mobile news reading experience. With a good-looking Android app and premium content from Aol’s top content brands, FLUD is definitely making some moves that make it an attractive alternative to Flipboard and Pulse (especially considering that Pulse recently scored a content deal with ESPN.)  Now the startup just needs to work on pushing out functionality that adds that real peer-to-peer, social component on top of the traditional news reader — not just by relying on social networks to share, but by incorporating location-based services to serve readers with hyper local news and deals. Also, look for a web app to drop within the near future as FLUD continues to round out its service and push for differentiation in a crowded market. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gild, which provides a way for developers to build and share their ‘skill profiles’, this morning announced that it has acquired Coderloop, the Italian startup behind the eponymous real-time coding assessment platform. In a message on its website, Coderloop confirms the acquisition and says it is no longer accepting new user registrations. They also say they’ll be “wrapping up operations” soon, offering users a way to migrate their profile to Gild instead. Gild posits that Coderloop’s automated code evaluation and scoring platform will allow it to create and deploy programming challenges, similar to Facebook Puzzles and Google Code Hacks, and automatically evaluate and score code submissions at  scale.  Gild’s mission is to build a skills-based network for developers from around the world. The Coderloop team, including the founders, Federico Feroldi and Luca Bonmassar will be joining Gild. As part of the acquisition, the Coderloop developer community will join Gild’s nearly 500,000 membership base from 174 countries. Gild was originally launched in September 2010 and is backed by Globespan Capital Partners. Coderloop started out as an idea in November 2009, and launched in mid-2010. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Luxury floral subscription service H.Bloom $4.7 million led by Battery Ventures with participation from existing angel investors, including Brian Lee, the founder of ShoeDazzle and LegalZoom; and Anton Levy, partner at General Atlantic, and board member of Gilt Groupe. This brings H.Bloom’s total funding to $8 million.  H.Bloom is hoping to disrupt the online floral delivery service by offering floral subscription plans at affordable rates. Their basic package is $30 per floral bundle (including shipping) and can be delivered on a weekly, monthly or bi-monthly basis. And the service delivers designer-quality arrangements (made by professional designers), to both residential and business customers, for approximately 70 percent off traditional floral boutique pricing. The startup serves New York City, Washington DC, and as of September 1st, Chicago. The flower industry is a $32 billion flower market, explains Bryan Burkhart, co-founder and CEO, and is ripe for innovation. Retailers have to pay for expensive store-fronts and an overwhelming percentage of flowers that spoil before a customer can purchase them. H.Bloom can offer competitive pricing by working directly with the growers, cutting out traditional overhead expenses and relying on the subscription plan model, which requires 7-day notice for cancellations. H.Bloom only orders flowers they need for set customer orders.  The subscription model seems to be working. The startup has seen revenue double every other quarter since its launch in April 2010. And the company only wastes around 1 percent of its inventory. Burkhart says that the response from commercial customers, such as those who want florals in their office space, is particularly positive.  H.Bloom will apply the new funds to hiring, expanding into new markets, and investing in sales and marketing. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Locu, a data-focused startup founded by MIT graduates and computer science researchers, is closing a seed round of over $600,000 from East and West coast investors, including Factual founder Gil Elbaz, Google’s Bruno Bowden, Cloudera founder Jeff Hammerbacher, Hubspot’s Dharmesh Shah, Twitter VP of Engineering Michael Abbott, Facebook co-founder Andrew McCollum, MIT’s Ed Roberts, Jean Hammond, Matt Ocko and Mitch Roberts. Early stage investment fund Quotidian Ventures is also involved. Locu plans to create the world’s largest real-time, structured repository of small business offerings data, such as restaurant menus, with the goal of helping better local search. The seed round was for $623,000, to be exact. 60% came from East Coast investors (Boston, New York) with 40% from West Coast investors (San Francisco, Los Angeles). There were also a couple of other Boston-area investors involved and one other early stage fund, who did not want their name disclosed. The startup’s founding team includes Rene Reinsberg, Marek Olszewski, Stelios Sidiroglou-Douskos and Marc Piette, and is advised by Fresh Pond Partners and Sep Kamvar, Professor of Computational and Mathematical Engineering at Stanford. The founders’ backgrounds include an impressive array of experience with Google, Cisco, IBM, Bloomberg, VMWare, Microsoft, Sun, McKinsey and Morgan Stanley. The founding members originally came together at MIT, where they won last year’s MIT Linked Data Ventures competition, supervised by Sir Tim Berners-Lee. Since then, Locu has grown its engineering team, but is still actively looking to hire more people over the next few months. The first product from Locu is the soon-to-launch MenuPlatform.com, which is designed to be a simple way for restaurant owners to keep their menu system up-to-date. The platform will include features like automatic import from any file format, integration with Facebook and other sites across the Web, a mobile application for on-the-fly, real-time editing, and, most importantly, fast and easy updating.  According to the company homepage, restaurant owners will be able to get their menu online in less than 5 minutes, with no need to call a webmaster. Besides being an easy-to-use platform for restaurant owners, the data within MenuPlatform is semantically-annotated (i.e., structured), too. The end result of applying a more structured taxonomy to this sort of real-world content could then lead to improvements in local search. For example, instead of simply searching for a nearby sushi restaurant, as you would today, you could search for a sushi restaurant offering a “rainbow roll” for less than $6.00. That, of course, is just a basic example of what Locu’s technology could provide in the future. In addition to search, developers will also be able to build rich apps around this structured local data using Locu’s APIs (application programming interfaces). Using a combination of document analysis, machine learning and online human computation workflows, Locu’s focus going forward is building efficient technologies that digitize real-world content, it says. Menus are only the beginning. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BountyJobs, which operates an online marketplace that connects corporate recruiters with a  network of headhunters, this morning announced it has secured $5 million in funding from existing investors. The financing round was led by Greylock Partners with the London offices of Accel Partners and RPM Ventures participating. BountyJobs currently boasts a marketplace of more than 10,000 pre-approved headhunters across the United States. Once employers are cleared to post job descriptions on the Web application, they can do so along with the fees they are willing to pay for successful hires (hence the company name). Headhunters, in turn, request permission to work on each job. BountyJobs chief exec Mike Hard says the additional capital will allow the company to expand software and services support for existing and future clients that regularly hire through contingent search agencies.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Remember Matthew Epstein, the guy that wanted to work at Google so badly that he created an interesting campaign in order to get the search and advertising giant’s attention? Well he did get their attention, partly because we urged Google to hire Epstein as fast as human-resourcesly possible. That said, at some point the company apparently lost interest in communicating with Epstein.  In an update posted to his blog this morning, Mr. Moustache says he has landed his ‘dream’ job – but not at Google. Writes Epstein: Well mustachios, three weeks and nearly half-a-million YouTube views later my quest to land my dream job has finally come to an end. In the past three weeks I’ve interviewed with many of the major tech companies in New York, Seattle and San Francisco. It’s been an incredible ride and an extremely humbling one to say the least. I received offers, rejections and everything in-between but in the end I was fortunate enough to have been given an offer that would allow me to fulfill my dream job. That offer came from a young San Francisco company called SigFig, and Epstein says he “turned down two household-name tech companies” to join the startup, which hasn’t yet publicly released its product but apparently aims to “bring transparency to the investment world”. So what about Google? Epstein does his best to not paint Google in a bad light whatsoever, but the way the company acted as described below does seem kind of peculiar: No, Google didn’t hire me nor did they extend an offer to me. That’s right ladies and gentleman – the big G turned me down. Why you ask? I’ve thought a lot about it and in all honesty I don’t know why. Unfortunately Google didn’t tell me why I didn’t receive the job but in in their defense withholding that type of information is a pretty standard HR practice amongst large corporations. Maybe it was my personality? Maybe it was my GPA? Maybe I answered a question wrong? Maybe I presented an incorrect solution to a theoretical problem? Maybe I didn’t do enough to verbalize my thought process? Maybe I posted something on my blog they didn’t like?  From day one of my campaign I told you all I wasn’t entitled to a job at Google just because I dug into my savings and created a campaign for them. At the end of the day they judged me on the same criteria they judge every other candidate on and I didn’t meet those criteria – plain and simple. Regardless of the reasoning behind Google’s decision, I fully respect their choice and think no less of them. Google has great people and great products. Everyone at Google was nothing but kind to me – from the employees that e-mailed me with good luck wishes to the recruiters that made me sweat during my interviews. Yesterday was Epstein’s first day at SigFig. The moustache is gone. My spider senses appear to be worthless. More details and stats right here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A few weeks ago, we heard that the San Francisco Port Authority had red-tagged Pier 38 — putting up warnings that the space was unsafe. This is a big deal because Pier 38 is something of a tech hub. It’s home to tenants including Dogpatch Labs, Polaris Ventures, Automattic, True Ventures, 99 Designs, EGG HAUS, and more. While Robert Scoble grabbed some pictures showing just how serious these notices were — it’s never good to see a big red sign with the word “UNSAFE” on the door to your business — Polaris’ Ryan Spoon downplayed the warnings. Here’s what he said to us at the time: Over the last few days, Pier 38 has undergone a management change (we have always been sub-tenants). The City of San Francisco has notified Pier 38 building management of specific code violations. We are in close contact with building management and the port authority – and we have been informed that normal operations should continue at this time. Meanwhile, the pier is as vibrant and active as ever: home to Dogpatch Labs, Polaris Ventures, Automattic, True Ventures, 99 Designs and many more. We’re working to better understand what the management change and ports plans mean for us all. Fast forward to last week. The Port Authority put up new signs indicating that all tenants had to vacate the property within 30 days. But some tenants were trying to negotiate ways to extend this window, and there was hope they could do that. But today, after a meeting between the Port Authority and the Pier 38 tenants, that hope has died. Everyone must be out by September 30. Again, this is awful news for the tech community that has thrived in the space which resides right on the water in the city. An important part of WordPress operates out of here. And the Dogpatch space Polaris set up gave a first home to startups like Instagram. Reached for comment, Spoon confirms the decision today and writes: The Port Authority of San Francisco notified all Pier 38 tenants, including us, that we must move out by September 30th. This is obviously unfortunate for the Pier and for the Dogpatch Labs – which has hosted over 250 entrepreneurs and 100+ companies like Instagram, Formspring, TaskRabbit, Recurly, Yardsellr, LOLapps, Appjet, etc. In total, these companies have raised over $100m in seed and venture funding. We are actively working on finding a great new Dogpatch Labs home and hope to be settled and taking applications by end of Q3. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Austin, Texas-based startup Spanning launched a new version of its Google Apps backup service today, which now includes business-grade backup for Gmail. Previously, the company provided backup for other Google Apps products, including Google Calendar, Docs, and Contacts, but, says, Spanning Cloud Apps founder and CEO Charlie Wood, “Gmail backup has been, by far, the most requested capability from our existing customer base.” But Google Apps is already in the cloud – why do you need to back it up? According to the company, even a company of Google’s size can have issues leading to data deletions. And not all data deletions are Google’s fault – sometimes, the end users themselves are to blame. Then what do you do? User-deleted data isn’t Google’s problem, so it can’t (and won’t) help you recover. Businesses, particularly the small-to-medium sized companies which currently comprise the majority of Spanning’s target market, still need to be assured that their mission-critical data is securely backed up, whether it’s in the cloud or not.  What’s interesting about Spanning’s backup product is that it doesn’t require businesses to maintain their own servers, nor does it utilize its own servers for data storage. Given that the company is still a startup, and could be prone to its own issues and failures, that latter item is a much-needed assurance. Instead, Spanning stores data on Amazon’s Web Services, using a combination of Amazon’s Simple Storage Service (S3 and Elastic Block Store (EBS), which provide 99.999999999% durability. Spanning backs up data incrementally, and doesn’t overwrite the old backups with new ones. Restorations are made possible from a simple-to-use interface. And it respects user permissions so that I.T. can’t view the file’s contents, they can only restore files when deleted. In addition, the Spanning Backup site, application, and Google Apps Marketplace listings are certified for privacy and security by TRUSTe, the leading online privacy solutions provider. It’s  also certified under the US-EU and US-Swiss SafeHarbor Frameworks. Wary consumers can also use Spanning to backup their own Gmail, Docs, Calendar and Contacts, too, if so inclined. It’s only $3/month for an individual account vs. $2.50/per user/per month for businesses. But consumers are not Spanning’s main focus. It’s more interested in providing businesses (SMB up to Enterprise) with a cloud backup solution. Spanning had previously raised $2 million in funding from the Foundry Group back in April. It competes with a very similar service from Backupify, but slightly undercuts them on pricing – $2.50/per user/per month vs. Backupify’s $3/per user/per month. It also hopes to capitalize on Backupify’s growing pains, we imagine.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sorry, Rovio. A Chinese theme park located in Changsha, Huna China clearly skipped Trademark Infringement 101 and built a very real, very authentic-looking Angry Birds game. Players pull back a gigantic slingshot loaded with plush Angry Birds and let them fly at balloon pigs sheltered in toy bricks. Chances are you need to make your own bird-flinging scream, though.  Angry Birds is a huge hit in China. The game was even part of the Chinese Mid-Autumn Festival although just in mooncake form. The explosive growth thanks in large part by Rovio’s acceptance of nearly every hardware platform has turned Angry Birds into a culture phenomenon abroad. Nothing says success like an unauthorized theme park game. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Wibbitz, a new service that functions as sort of a “play button” for the Web, has just raised a seed round of approximately half a million. The service is similar to former TechCrunch Disrupt winner Qwiki, in that it, too, automatically generates videos on the fly using the content found on a given website. But unlike Qwiki, Wibbitz is positioned as a tool designed specifically for publishers who want to provide an easy-to-digest video summary of an article or articles’ content. Disclosure: Roi Cathy, who has written for TechCrunch over the past 5 years, is an investor in Wibbitz via Initial Capital, where he’s a Managing Partner. The technology itself is easy to implement: just a single line of JavaScript code is all that’s needed to create the video summary. Once implemented, Wibbitz takes an article’s text and automatically creates a summary, adding in images from either the website’s own image library, or a public image bank containing images licensed as Creative Commons (i.e., those designated OK for re-use). The end product is an easily digestible video containing text, images and audio narration, which is surprisingly listenable. Here’s an example. And below, a screenshot.  The video can be shared to Facebook, posted as a link on Twitter, or embedded elsewhere, depending on the publisher’s preferences. It also includes both a Flash and mobile-friendly HTML5 interface, and presents the appropriate version depending on the browser and platform detected. Wibbitz already has 1,600 sites which have been testing a more basic form of the service while in private beta.  Starting today, the company will be begin accepting registrations from those who want to try it the newer player on their own Web site or blog. The product will offer freemium pricing, with larger publishers paying by usage. Publishers will also be able to further monetize their content by way of short pre-roll ads, if desired. While Qwiki’s technology is certainly impressive, Wibbitz’ attempt to address the real-world problem of information overload through video summaries serves as a more practical implementation of the technology’s potential. Think of it like this: Qwiki is a way to consume information about a general topic (e.g. a Wikipedia page), while Wibbitz is a way to consume a single article. That said, either company could easily expand into the other’s domain at any time. In addition, whether or not the mainstream Internet-surfing audience will go for this idea is still unproven. Qwiki has a great, engaging service and iPad app, but is it a daily “must?” Not really. Wibbitz, based in Tel Aviv, was founded by Zohar Dayan and Yotam Cohen. Dayan tells us that their technology was already in development before they ever saw Qwiki’s launch at TechCrunch Disrupt in November 2010. Seed round investors include Lool Ventures, Initial Capital and Kima Ventures. The exact funding amount was not disclosed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Photographers, take note. A startup called JPEGmini is introducing a new photo compression technology for JPEG photos which reduces the overall file size (by up to 5 times), while preserving the photo’s quality and resolution. The technology is designed specifically with the Web in mind, as more photographers, both amateur and professional, use online storage for photo archival purposes. With JPEGmini, photos can be uploaded, emailed and shared faster, while saving on storage and bandwidth costs. Sounds great, of course. But the question is: does it work? According to the company, the JPEGmini technology works by analyzing the input image using a unique quality detector which imitates the human visual system. Based on this analysis, it applies the maximum amount of compression which will not cause visible artifacts. The second part of the system is a JPEG encoder, which adapts the JPEG encoding process to the original photos, creating the most compact representation of the photos that is possible under the JPEG standard. So, to be clear: JPEGmini is not a new file format, it uses the JPEG file format. And in some cases, it can achieve a recompression ratio of up to 5 times, or an 80% reduction.  The key phrase here is “some cases.” JPEGmini doesn’t always surpass the capabilities of current technology, it seems. Says San Francisco-based professional photographer Jim Goldstein of JMG Galleries, in tests, JPEGmini achieves greater file size savings on larger Web images than Photoshop did. But with smaller images, Photoshop’s “Save for Web” setting (at 60% quality) did better. (More details on the tests here). This seems to confirm what JPEGmini itself says – the higher the original JPEG photo resolution, the greater the file size reduction it can offer. (Only photos 8 MP and higher can achieve the 80% reduction rate using this technology, for example). As a professional photographer, Goldstein was also careful to read through the Terms of Service for JPEGmini, which says that if you choose to upload a photo to the site, they can use it to promote their service. This is overly broad, but could be ameliorated simply by adding the line “upon request.” In addition, it’s worth noting that JPEGmini preserves all the photo’s metadata. Still, for professionals, the best savings and balance of image quality would come from saving a JPEG for a RAW file, and ideally, doing compressions in batches, not one-by-one as with JPEGmini’s service, explains Goldstein. Correction: JPEGmini lets you upload folders.  So perhaps professional photographers don’t have need of JPEGmini, after all. But other consumers might…especially those who don’t own a copy of Adobe Photoshop or Lightroom, for example. The technology could be integrated into consumer electronics, like phones and digital cameras, too, as a way to save storage space and bandwidth when saving or sharing photos. JPEGmini was developed by ICVT, an Israeli startup company based in Tel-Aviv. Its founder, Sharon Carmel, previously co-founded Emblaze, which developed the Internet’s first vector-based graphics player, preceding Macromedia Flash, and BeInSync, a P2P sync and backup company acquired by Phoenix Technologies in 2008. JPEGmini is self-funded. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Seedcamp Week, the annual week-long session run by Europe’s oldest tech startup accelerator, has kicked off in London, and it looks like the biggest yet. In particular, this week sees changes to the way Seedcamp has operated in the past which indicates a clear uptick in how the European tech scene is fairing. When Seedcamp first started in September 2007 – the same Week TechCrunch Europe launched – it funded six out of 20 companies that pitched.  This week 16 of the 20 Seedcamp companies presenting this week have already received the initial Seedcamp investment. Seedcamp normally invest €50,000 (for 5-10%) as standard but sometimes they invest less for less of a stake, (though these exact terms are not usually disclosed). The contrast with last year is that 13 companies got the investment and there was no follow-on funding. Another change is that last year there was a competition by all the teams for investment. This year the four remaining that haven’t had the initial investment (out of the 20) will be interviewed at the end of the week. And, at the end of the week, the companies considered by Seedcamp and mentors to be the top three of all 20 will receive a cash prize, which they can use as a part of a ‘follow-on’ round. The winner gets €25,000, second place gets €15,000, third place wins €10,000. Lastly, there are no “new” teams at Seedcamp this week. All of them have appeared at Mini Seedcamp days already at events around Europe. In years gone by there were always a few wild-cards – this year, this is the “creme de la creme”, if you will. Now, after four years you would think we would be starting to see some exits among former Seedcamp companies and a new eco-system develop around it. But only Mobclix was acquired last year for a reputed $50m – a pretty good “European” exit.  Meanwhile many former Seedcamp companies are still going, though exits are, as I point out above, thin on the ground.  However, we shouldn’t worry. As a Seedcamp investor told me yesterday “We might see an exit soon form a former Seedcamp companies, but we’re relaxed about that. We’d rather see these companies build up to the point where they can knock it out of the park.” I think that’s the right take on this. It’s unusual for companies to see liquidity events in this short time period, and it’s better not to focus on an exit anyway. In addition, the trend amongst the companies chose this year are a mix of evolution on existing business models and disruption of traditional industries. So thus, GrabCad is targeting the traditional sector of engineering. Farmeron is about targeting the agriculture sector. Vox.io is about the evolution of the third generation of telephony – you get the picture. But I’ll be exploring the startups selected in a separate post shortly. (Above, Seedcamp’s Carlos Eduardo Espinal, Saul Klein, Reshma Sohoni) Latest headlines delivered to you daily Bidmyway is a newly launched local deals app operating in the Chicago market. As opposed to being a deals aggregator for more popular brands like Groupon or Living Social, the app offers exclusive deals made with local merchants. What’s unique about Bidmyway is its interface and how the deals are presented to end users. Consumers “dial up” local deals using a click wheel reminiscent of the one found on old-style iPods. The wheel is used to select the budget you have available for deals. Spin to select the amount, lock it in and Bidmyway shows you the best deals within a specified radius, ranked and listed on a map. You can then purchase the deal right from the mobile app itself.  It’s an interesting take on how mobile deals should work – instead of being presented with a single deal for a given geographic region, like a city, you filter a larger list of hyperlocal deals for those that are both within your budget and your vicinity. It’s a concept that could easily help users to better sort through the ever-growing number of deals available, so it’s actually somewhat of a shame (for the rest of us, at least) that Bidmyway launched as an independent deals broker, instead of an aggregator. Bidmyway CEO John T. Shave says he believes that “hyperlocal mobile” is the future of the deals industry. It’s not a surprise, then, that he felt the need to build a new system from the ground-up, right down to the new deal-filtering mechanism. He also notes that Bidmyway is the better option for merchants who need to launch a mobile deal immediately – for example, a restaurant having a slow night. Through the app, a retailer or small business owner can instantly offer a deal and post it, allowing them to attract customers right away, and most importantly, while those customers are out and about looking for something to do. Although Bidmyway is available for download on iPhone and Android right now, as noted above, the only deals available are in the Chicago area (incidentally, also the birthplace of Groupon.) In the future, the company hopes to expand to other markets. Bidmyway is owned and operated by local commerce company Elite Media Worx, which also runs the daily deals site EliteCityDeals. Elite Media Worx previously raised $1.35 million in funding back in April. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A lot has been said about gamification, dubbed badgification by some, and it seems people are still divided over whether it’s a fad or the future.  Be that as it may, one area where I think it just might work is health and fitness improvement. Enter Foodzy, a service that enables users to keep track of what and how much they eat over time, in order to provide them with some insights on how to eat and live healthier, lose weight or simply on how their eating habits compare to their friends. Today, the fledgling Amsterdam company behind the service (not to be confused with Foodzie by the way) is launching free applications for iOS and Android, although one needs a Foodzy Pro account ($15 per year) to log in. The app helps people keep track of what they eat even when they’re on the move. Using Foodzy, one can access deep statistics and unlock badges (there we are!) for healthy eating habits, but also for fun ones – think Hangover badges for when you’ve consumed too much alcohol in a single night, or a BBQ badge for barbecuing more than 5 times in one Summer. Foodzy uses localized food databases from over 58 countries, and is currently available in English, French, German and Dutch. You can check out Foodzy free of charge, but the number of badges you can earn are limited and your eating history will not be kept longer than 30 days. Also, as I mentioned before, you need to cough up cash for the premium version of the service and to be able to use the mobile applications. Foodzy was one of the 18 finalists at this year’s TNW Conference Startup Rally, where it was ‘soft-launched’ – they opened up for public beta about two months ago.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily At any company level, the board of directors has a direct impact on the organization’s product strategy, hiring, fundraising and much more. And startups have to be very selective in choosing board members who will advise the company in the right direction.  In the big company realm, both the media and the company’s shareholders have questioned Yahoo’s board, which continues to employ a floundering Carol Bartz as CEO and supports a bizarre product and business strategy. Then you look at Facebook, where founder Mark Zuckerberg has strategically assembled an all-star board to help the company grow as a public company and expand into new directions. Most recently, Facebook added Netflix co-founder and CEO Reed Hastings to its board, joining Marc Andreessen, Jim Breyer, Donald E. Graham, Peter Thiel and Zuck himself. Hastings not only will add his experience in taking a web company public, but he will also help Facebook navigate potential movie and TV show streaming opportunities. Facebook has a rock solid board—almost every member has been a strong innovator in the past few decades. As we saw with HP, even huge, established companies need to make changes in board structure as a company’s strategy shifts. HP added  five new board members early this year as new CEO Leo Apotheker took the reins. Of course, fast forward seven months and HP has announced that it will be discontinuing operations surrounding the TouchPad and all webOS phones, a major move for the company and certainly one that was influenced by the board. The fact is that the board plays an extremely important role in some of the major events for any company with shareholders. The board helps manage and make decisions about financing, acquisitions, product strategy and even an IPO. So it goes without saying that entrepreneurs are faced with challenging decisions assembling a board.  For big public companies, this has always been the case, but the role of the board at startups is also changing.  I interviewed a handful of early-stage investors (and former entrepreneurs)—Jeff Clavier, Keith Rabois, Dave McClure, and Paul Lee—to find out what startup founders should know about picking and managing a board. Lightbank partner Paul Lee echoes this thought, telling me that entrepreneurs have to be “very careful” about how they put their board together. “Each stage is different in terms of who you bring on,” he explains. “With an early startup in Series A funding, a smaller board is better because disparate voices make agility as a startup harder. When you get to five members, it is more difficult to come to a consensus.” Of course, there’s a balance between finding board members who both challenge the company as well as reason with the founders when necessary. Having both is crucial, says Lee. He also feels strongly that giving equity to board members without any investment is not the right formula for many early-stage startups. “Entrepreneurs want board members to be vested in the company, and the board members need to have some skin in the game to serve the company best.” In later stage companies, it makes sense to add seasoned execs who have run a successful companies in the role of the “CEO Coach.” In Facebook’s case, Hastings could fill that role. Another recent example of this was showcased by LinkedIn. In 2010, LinkedIn added former Ask.com CEO George “Skip” Battle to its board, as well as Netflix’s CMO Leslie Kilgore pre-IPO. In the past, Lee says that the board used to be seen as a “collector item” of sorts, where it was an opportunity to add prestige to a company by adding well-known board members and CEOs. Board members basically sat there and looked pretty. Now, he explains, the board has become a more integrated part of a company where board members have actual responsibilities and are held accountable. Well known angel investor Jeff Clavier, who runs his fund SoftTech VC, agrees with Lee that the role of the board has evolved in the past decade. As micro-venture funding started to come into play in funding startups, angel investors can’t sit on as many boards as they invest in. He says that in early rounds where there are 12 different investors (which happens pretty often these days), entrepreneurs have to make a strategic decision as to which investor or VC should take a board seat. With a group of rock-star investors, it can be difficult to choose who should join the board and who has the time for the role. Clavier says that board member roles have become more proactive. As opposed to just sitting on monthly calls, more entrepreneurs are giving board members tasks outside the meeting such as helping recruit talent. For example, Clavier tells me that Zynga’s CEO and founder Marc Pincus would allocate certain jobs to board members, who had to produce a report on the status of tasks at meetings. He says that a successful startup brings together strong investors and advisors and engages them both in and outside the boardroom. In fact, he compares early stage startups to houses with a bunch of holes in the foundations. One way to fill those holes is adding the right board members and advisors. As opposed to ten years ago, there are many more outside individuals involved in a startup’s progress from an idea to an actual company, and Clavier advises entrepreneurs to create a support network with a board. For example, many startups have created both boards of advisors as well as boards of directors. And he believes it is important for mid-stage, more mature companies to add experts from outside the investment community to a board. For example, the  addition of former Ticketmaster CEO Sean Moriarty to online event tickets platform Eventbrite last year. Keith Rabois, who is currently the COO of Square and an angel investor, has a unique perspective on the changes in boards over time, having been on both sides of the equation. He relates the experience of selecting a board to getting married with no possibility of divorce. Jokes aside, similar to Zuckerberg, Rabois and Jack Dorsey have built an all-star board at Square. Kleiner Perkins Partner and former Morgan Stanley Internet analyst Mary Meeker, Vinod Khosla, and former U.S. Treasury Secretary Larry Summers all joined the mobile payments company’s board this year. Sequoia partner Roelof Botha also sits on Square’s board. Rabois tells me point blank that very few investors are actually capable of adding a lot of value to company boards. But in Square’s case, all of the VCs on the board had prior careers that made their additions a natural fit for Square. He says that Boetha’s experience as CFO of PayPal made him an ideal addition. And Khosla’s insight as an entrepreneur and CEO of a multi-billion dollar company (Sun Microsystems) added a lot of value to Square. Meeker has made a career out of studying and analyzing what makes a successful technology company and this brought a new level of expertise to the payments company, says Rabois. Square’s board meets every two months, and Rabois says there is really no set agenda in the board meetings. The group starts by reviewing the financial and business performance of the company, and focuses on several long and short discussion items that arise. As for how boards have evolved over time, Rabois feels that today’s best entrepreneurs have moved away from a model where investors are supervising companies and are looking to bring more value-add to boards with seats. But how to extract value from a board can be a challenge for many young entrepreneurs. His advice to entrepreneurs is to recruit board members and advisors that you can learn the most from. And he says entrepreneurs should get into the discipline of having regular reviews with investors and board members. Another trend that is taking place in current board structures is that founders are retaining board control longer, even as the company matures. Q&A platform Quora only has three board members, after taking an $11 million round of funding from Benchmark in 2010. Founders Adam D’Angelo and Charlie Cheever both have seats as well as Benchmark’s Matt Cohler. Angel investor Dave McClure advises startups to keep control for as long as they can, and be judicious about selecting board members. In fact, McClure, who has invested in hundreds of companies, only sits on three boards himself. Of course, that doesn’t mean that founders should eliminate the board altogether, but McClure says it should be a gradual process. His belief is that if a startup has two founders, both should have seats, and it should add an investor in a Series A round, then perhaps another investor in a Series B round, as well as an independent “expert” of sorts. He also says that the more recent trend of 15 to 20 investors piled into a round  with no board seats can be problematic. “Everyone is along for the ride and no one is watching what is going on at the company,” he explains. And I’ve heard similar sentiment expressed from others in the investing community as well. There are so many stories in Silicon Valley of board members shirking their responsibilities to early-stage startups by making it only to one out of every three meetings and worse. And board members that has different goals from entrepreneurs could easily block a major exit for a startup, or even a new funding round. The general consensus from all the investors and entrepreneurs I spoke to is to choose your board very, very wisely, and don’t rush into any decisions about naming board members. Photo Credit/Flickr/Gibffe Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFounder Advice for Madbrook PublishingBrian Snyder is the Founder and CEO of Madbrook Publishing, an educational/entertainment company that publishes Everything Butt Art. Snyder says Everything Butt Art’s mission is to “teach kids to draw, always starting with the butt shape” which is a format that “really engages kids.” After presenting on-stage during TechCrunch Disrupt, New York Snyder came into our studio for an Office Hours session with Hunch’s Chris Dixon and First Round Capital’s Josh Kopelman. Snyder initially asked the two founders for advice on making his educational content “device-agnostic.” After sharing insights, Kopelman asked Snyder what kind of company he wanted build; “a venture backed company” or a “cash generation business?” Offering his two-cents on the venture world, Kopelman told Snyder “the more you are viewed as a platform, versus specific content I think improves your positioning.” While recognizing that there are successful content based businesses, Dixon agreed with Kopelman and told Snyder “venture style investors are weary of [content based businesses]. [Content] is sort of a bad word in the business because it is sort of hit driven.“ Kopelman concludes by telling Snyder “the challenge is, if someone is investing now they need to decide are we investing in this hit, are we investing in the Butt Art concept and if Butt Art works great, and if Butt Art fails does that mean the investment fails?” In essence, “am I investing in a title or am I investing in a company?” Make sure to check out previous episodes of Founder Office Hours which feature entrepreneurs from SchedIt, Profitably, Dispatch.io, and Napkin Labs. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Since 2006, Zave Networks has been working on digitizing coupons and loyalty rewards programs with products like Zavers. With the rise of smartphones, the market has been exploding. Today, Zave Networks takes their cause to a much bigger potential audience: Google has just acquired them. As they have announced on their site, “When we had the opportunity to join Google, we felt it was the perfect fit for our company and the perfect opportunity to rapidly drive the deployment and use of our platform to the next level.” Says a Google spokesperson: “We’re thrilled to welcome the Zave Networks team to Google. They have developed an impressive platform to connect consumers with coupons, special offers and reward programs for their favorite businesses, and we look forward to their joining our Commerce team.” We hear that Zave will continue to offer their services to consumers, retailers, and marketers for now. But the play for Google here appears to be to bulk up their Commerce and Wallet products. Terms of the deal are not being disclosed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Instagram is growing like crazy. In June, we noted when the service hit the 5 million user milestone, with 95 million photos uploaded. At the beginning of August, Instagram reached 150 million photos. And now the service has surpassed yet another milestone: 200 million photos. Given that our last measurement was at the beginning of August, and the site is now well beyond 200M, that means that Instagram added some 50 million photos in August alone. In keeping with our previous Flickr comparisons, that’s 200 million photos for the 10-month old Instagram, when it took Flickr almost 2 years to reach 100 million photos. Still, that’s a bit of an apples and oranges comparison, isn’t it? After all, Flickr reached its 100 millionth photo back in February 2006. The iPhone itself wasn’t unveiled until June 2007. And even then, it was nowhere near as ubiquitous a device as it is today. And as we noted before, Flickr is now well past 5 billion photos, an increase that has also been impacted by the iPhone’s existence. Still, 200 million photos is another nice milestone for Instagram to reach. And it’s impressive how quickly it got there. By the way, if you’re curious how to keep track of Instagram’s numbers for yourself, Hans Kullin posted a hack on his blog, which involves using the third-party service Inkstagram. The URL’s found there are in sequential order. For example, this is the first ever published Instagram photo: http://inkstagram.com/#/photos/2. (Photo #1 is missing). This is the 150 millionth: http://inkstagram.com/#/photos/150000003, as previously confirmed. In that case, this would be the 200 millionth, but the photo is private, so, sadly, you can’t view it. As for Instagram, it didn’t even notice the milestone until we pointed it out to them. They must be too busy working on their Android app over there. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google is working fast and furious to streamline their product offerings. Just a couple weeks after killing off all but one of the projects in their Slide division, today comes another death: Aardvark. Co-founder Max Ventilla says the service will shut down at the end of this month. We broke the news of Google and Aardvark talking in late 2009. By February 2010, they had a deal: Google bought Aardvark for $50 million. But Google never really did anything interesting with Aardvark, despite the big time potential. It was a type of social search that paved the way for services like Quora and now Jig. Instead of having them focus on Search, Google put most of the Aardvark team on the Google+ project. Here’s Ventilla’s full letter to users: As part of the shutdown of GoogleLabs, Aardvark will be shutting down at the end of September. Aardvark began as a small experiment in a new kind of social search, and over a few years blossomed into a service that made millions of connections between people to answer each other’s questions. It was a great experience in seeking to combine a broad vision for the future of technology with a rigorous user-centered design process. Over this time, we learned a lot about creating and maintaining online communities, and how to facilitate sharing of knowledge between people. We’ve been excited to share these lessons within Google over the past year, especially as part of the effort behind Google+. It has been gratifying to see how well this project is doing — even in these early stages, Google+ has already become a great place to share knowledge online, eclipsing the original vark.com! — and there is much more to come very soon. In this and other projects at Google, the Aardvark team remains committed to developing powerful tools for connecting people and improving access to information. Of course, we’re also sad to say goodbye to the original Aardvark here at vark.com. Who would have thought that a digital version of a nocturnal burrowing mammal would have engendered so much affection! We’re very grateful to the whole Aardvark community for your support along the way. Onwards, Max and Damon p.s.  In the spirit of data liberation, we want to make sure that any of you Aardvark users who would like to retrieve your past data from the service can do so.  Right now of course you can log in and manually copy anything you’d like to keep.  Or if you prefer, you can email us at support@vark.com and we’ll send you a bulk dump of your data (please allow time for us to process these).  After September 30, there will be no way to retrieve your data, as shortly after that we will delete everything permanently. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Visier, which builds ‘analytic applications for human resources’, has raised $6 million in funding according to an SEC filing published this morning. It’s the startup’s first institutional venture funding round since its inception in 2010. Notably, Visier was co-founded by ex-Business Objectives chief and SAP exec John Schwarz (CEO) and Ryan Wong (CTO), who held senior engineering roles at Business Objects and, after their acquisition by SAP, was the VP of Engineering for the SAP Business Objects BI platform and tools.  Furthermore, former SAP SVP Dave Weisbeck (CSO) is also part of Visier’s management team. Basically, Visier’s mission is to help companies identify important insights about their business and deliver them to human resources decision makers in an enjoyable way using nifty visualization techniques (see video below to get an idea).  Visier describes it as building ‘analytic applications for people’ on its website. The business analytics startup invites companies to sign up for a free demo. We’ve contacted Visier to see which investors are backing the fledgling company. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In January, AppRedeem raised $750,000 from SV Angel and Blue Run Ventures to offer mobile app developers innovative, effective solutions aimed at driving app installs and engagement. Since then, the startup has been quietly working its way into a hot new category: Deals. Today, the Mountain View-based startup is officially announcing AppRedeem Deals, a new mobile in-app promotional network that rewards users for continued app engagement, while helping developers to drive conversion to paid versions of their apps. To test the waters, the startup began with “The Moron Test Section 2”, currently the third ranked free app on the iTunes app store. To use this app as an example of how AppRedeem Deals works, AppRedeem presents a promotional discount for Moron Test’s paid app. The startup is currently offering 50 to 100 percent off those paid apps from within its free counterpart. Unlike Tapjoy, said AppRedeem Co-founder Sheffield Nolan, AppRedeem Deals aims to ensure that people taking advantage of the discount have already installed the free version without any incentive, so the motivation to buy the paid version is fully aligned with that of Apple and its policy.  According to Nolan, this enables users of the free app to take advantage of the opportunity to upgrade at no cost to them, whereas for developers, their paid apps are then monetized more effectively, and they get to use those promotional dollars targeting people who already tried and enjoyed their apps. Since launching the beta 6 weeks ago, AppRedeem membership has grown from 55,000 to over 580,000 — in other words, membership has grown by more than 34K members per day since adding Deals. Here are the key numbers that came from the first 6 weeks of AppRedeem ‘Deals’. Nolan tells me that, at first, AppRedeem will use their new deals network as a customer acquisition tool. At present, they are not taking a cut of the discount they are offering gamers, so all the money earned from the discounts is going straight to the developers. The team plans to offer cuts and take a small percentage of the deal in the future. The startup’s next focus, the co-founder said, is to begin helping developers drive increased engagement of their apps, and to begin implementing deals with more partners to enable further functionality to promotional offers for in-app purchases. In the last week, Nolan said, AppRedeem hit profitability, so they will also be looking to raise a series A round in the coming months. (They will also be announcing the addition of a top executive of a big deals company in the near future.) For more, check out AppRedeem at home here.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this week, we covered Blackbox, the young company responsible for creating The Startup Genome Report, an ongoing, collaborative R&D project designed to take a comprehensive dive into what makes Silicon Valley startups successful — and not. (Read our initial coverage here.) On Tuesday, we covered the company’s launch of what it calls the Startup Genome Compass, a benchmarking tool for startups that helps founders monitor their progress in different growth categories. Since then, more than 6,000 startups have signed up to use the Compass.  Along with the diagnostic tool, Blackbox also released a new research report on the major causes of startup failure, including perhaps more significantly, the primary cause of startups kicking the bucket: Premature scaling. While this was touched on in our prior coverage, we thought it might be worth elaborating on their findings, including presenting a nifty infographic created by the team over at Visual.ly. To refresh, since February, Blackbox has collected a dataset from over 3,200 high-growth tech startups, with the results of their studies showing that premature scaling is the primary cause of startup failure, afflicting 70 percent of all the startups that went to meet their maker. And, a related point that’s worthy of note: Based on those 3,200 startups, the experience of entrepreneurs, gender, country origin, education and age had no influence on the predicted likelihood of failure.  But, as some astute readers in the comment section of our prior post pointed out, it certainly can seem dangerous to mine a large and diverse set of data created by startups (and in turn by actual — and equally diverse — human beings) to claim that the world has found one single, ultimate cause of failure that can be used as a prescription for startups of every stripe, across the board. While the Blackbox team may disagree slightly, the study is aimed at helping early-stage companies avoid the deadpool. Simple as that. The Startup Genome is an ongoing research project seemingly intended to illuminate, not force-feed prescriptions. It is scientific in its approach, some of its language may seem dry — and it may not work for everyone. What’s more, “premature scaling” may seem an overly simplistic term, and it may be easy to misconstrue. The Blackbox team defined premature scaling in their research as a way of denoting the fact that a startup’s core dimensions (product, customer, team, finances and business model) are out of sync. That is to say: One (or more) are moving at different speeds of growth than others. As Blackbox Co-founder Bjoern Herrmann pointed out, “in some cases dysfunctional scaling may be a better description”.  With this description in mind, the research found some fairly striking differences between those startups that scaled prematurely (or dysfunctionally) as opposed to those who were more in sync. Most notably: Not a single startup that scaled prematurely passed the 100,000 user mark. Not only that, but 93 percent of those startups never crossed the $100K-a-year-in-revenue threshold. And, perhaps somewhat counterintuitively, startups that scale properly grow 20 times faster than startups that scaled prematurely. Investor and serial entrepreneur Brad Feld weighed in on premature scaling to say, “Hiring any substantive number of sales or marketing people before there is customer adoption is premature scaling. All the early hires should be technical or product focused. At least one of the co-founders, though, should be obsessed with sales and marketing from the beginning. Adding one sales person after the product is in the market and one marketing person is fine, but these should be ‘doers’ not ‘VPs'”.  As a further means of elaborating on how the Blackbox team defined their research, Hermann said that they defined startups as “temporary organizations that are designed to evolve into large companies”. Once defined, the team then attempted to bring a scientific approach to understanding the lifecycle of  those startups — almost like a behavioral psychologist — by defining six stages of development they evolve through: Discovery, Validation, Efficiency, Scale, Sustain, and Conservation.  Early stage startups are designed, Herrmann said, to search for product/market fit under conditions of extreme uncertainty, whereas late stage startups are designed to search for a repeatable and scalable business model and then scale into large companies designed to execute under conditions of much higher certainty. Sounds reasonable.  But they went further: Every startup, they determined, has an actual stage and a behavioral stage, in which the “Actual stage” is measured by customer response to the startup’s product, through looking at metrics like numbers of users, user growth, activation rate, retention rate, revenue, etc. The “behavioral stage”, then, is made up of five top level dimensions that the startup can control, like Customer, Product, Team, Financials and Business Model. Each dimension, both the Actual and Behavioral are always classified, Herrmann said, into one of the six developmental stages. In terms of how this model relates to premature scaling, a startup received this label in the research when its behavioral stage became “larger” than its actual stage. An obvious example of premature scaling, the Blackbox Co-founder said, would be a startup that rapidly scales up its team to 30 to 40 people before it has any customers. In this example, the Actual stage of the startup would be in Validation but the Behavioral stage of the team would be in Scale.  On the other hand, Blackbox tends to define “dysfunctional scaling” as a case in which the Behavioral Stage is lower than the actual stage. Startup that provide examples of this, according to Blackbox, include: Tokbox, Friendster, Orkut, Wesabe, Digg, SixApart, Myspace, abd Chatroullete. But rather than go into each of the individual stages, here’s an example from one: Specifically, that of the olde “customer acquisition” category. Blackbox labeled a startup as scaling prematurely in relation to its customer acquisition when it, for example, spent too much money on acquisition before truly refining its actual product or market fit — or, alternatively, overcompensating or missing product and market fit with too much of a focus on marketing and press spending. An illuminating stat in this case is that startups are 2.3 times more likely to spend more on customer acquisition before getting all other categories in sync. Blackbox cited Color, Webvan, and Pets.com as examples of startups that spent too much, too early on the customer acquisition dimension. For now, we’ll leave it at that. But for those who are interested in more, check out Blackbox’s research on premature scaling here. And without further ado, Visual.ly’s infographic on premature scaling is below:   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gootip, the location-based Q&A startup from France, launched in May to take on Hipster (we think, as Hipster is still stealth) and other sites like it trying to make Yahoo Answers, for example, a valuable, realtime service. Gootip was founded by PriceMinister alumni Mathieu Bidart, Eric Gagnaire and Thierry Sebba, and operates out of a small garage in the South West of France. I’ve seen the pictures, and these guys are bootstrapping all the way, looking like the Jobs and Woz of Southwestern France. But Gootip, in spite of a questionable name, is trying to separate itself from other Q&A services out there, like LocalMind for example, by not only enabling users to ask and answer questions in context of a particular city, town or specific location, but by going a few steps farther. Gootip allows users to sign up and link their accounts to Foursquare and Facebook to integrate their check-in data, along with their home and work location. Users then categorize their questions (be it by nightlife, shopping, arts and entertainment, etc.) and enter an expiration date for when they need their question answered by, whether that be 24 hours or one week. As Steve O’hear pointed out in our initial coverage, Gootip is proving that the barrier to entry for location-based Q&A sites taking advantage of Facebook and Twitter’s data sets has “gotten lower” and young, savvy startups can quickly build services that offer worthwhile expansions of the popular social networks. However, at the time of their beta launch, as he noted, there were a few key pieces missing. So, to make Gootip more than a simple website or mobile app, the startup is aiming at building a platform that can retrieve and analyze local questions and answers from both internal and external services: Web, mobile, APIs, SMS, social networks, and beyond. It’s an ambitious goal, but to get started and showcase how functionality can work with other big social networks, Gootip has created “Askgtip”, which it calls a “mentioned application” that works with Twitter (and soon Facebook, Foursquare, and Gowalla) to ask questions of their favorite social networks — in this case, Twitter. Askgtip allows users to ask questions directly of Twitter, whereupon the startup will analyze the question, pull location data, and post it to Twitter and Gootip.com so that users of both will be able to see the question and post an answer. The application retrieves answers given on Twitter and displays them on their homepage, specifying locations given in the answers. Askgtip also supports Twitter’s topics, which are often linked to an event (like #tcdisrupt, for example), which will be analyzed by the application and linked to a specific location. That’s the main pain point Gootip is trying to address: The difficulty of finding locations and analyzing questions to produce the correct location and location-correct data.  So, for example, if you were to ask “Who is the best doctor in the ‘Mission District’ in San Francisco?” Gootip would convert “Mission District” to a location that exists on the Gootip website so that when Askgtip answers the question (because users have answered on Gootip), transforming it into a map and location on both sites, in short, bringing Gootip’s functionality to Twitter. As the startup rolls out its service for various social networks, it is also opening up its APIs and plugins. In the coming weeks, Gootip Co-founder Mathieu Bidart says, Sud Quest (one of the biggest local, daily press groups in France) will be integrating the startup’s API to allow users to ask local questions directly from, in this case, Sud Quest’s website. Beyond the addition of plugins and widgets to enable partnering websites to take advantage of Gootip’s features, the startup is also launching an iPhone app to enable users to search, ask and answer questions, with content presented based on a user’s GPS location — all from the comfort of your iPhone. The cool thing about Gootip is that it’s already working with over 30 million locations, so that every Gootip search can be performed by keyword (or by using your GPS default on mobile) from millions of towns and cities across the globe. Results are presented with the number of answers to the question, with locations pinned on an interactive map with all the details, including address, phone numbers, etc. Gootip has also enabled Facebook and Twitter authentication to the new mobile app to allow users to sign in through the social networks, on top of simply signing in through the Gootip.com — the website already offers authentication with Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare, Gowalla and Google — plus, the service is now available in English and French, with German and Spanish translations launching in the next few weeks. O’hear pointed out several things that Gootip would need to accomplish after launching their beta, and with a new iPhone app (Android is coming soon), plugins and widgets, open APIs, Twitter functionality, and new languages, Gootip has certainly made some great progress. The UX does still need a little tweaking (along with some of the translations), but for three guys bootstrapping in their garage, Gootip has already made leaps and bounds. Hipster better be ready. For more on Gootip, check them out at home here, and play with Askgtip here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Every year the World Economic Forum picks a number of up-and-coming technology startups from around the world and dubs them Technology Pioneers. Past members of this club include Google, Mozilla, Mint, Etsy, Twitter, Amiando, Playfish, Obopay, and Brightcove Today, The World Economic Forum announced 25 new members of the 2012 class of Technology Pioneers, who will be honored at a conference in China in September. This year’s group includes CloudFlare, DoubleVerify, Dropbox, Kickstarter, Lending Club, and Palantir Technologies. CloudFlare, which was a TechCrunch Disrupt runner-up last Fall, offers a service that protects websites from online threats, promises and increase in page load speeds, and more. The startup made recently waves when it was revealed the security service was being used by infamous hackers LulzSec. And CloudFare just announced a $20 million round of funding. File sharing company Dropbox is on a roll of late, with its 25 million users (many of which are paying), uploading 200 million files a day. The company is expected to announce a $200 million to $300 million  funding round soon, which could value the company at a whopping $4 billion. Founded in 2004 by former PayPal employees and Stanford computer scientists, Palantir offers a high-powered analysis platform for businesses and governments. The company analyzes a variety of data including structured, unstructured, relational, temporal, and geospatial content. The virtue of of Palantir is that it accepts huge databases and allows users to slice and dice this information. The company has raised a massive $175 million, most recently adding $50 million to its coffers. Crowd-funding website Kickstarter allows anyone with an idea for a film, album, art project, or product to make their pitch, say how much they need to get started, and ask for pledges. Once the minimum amount needed is pledged, the project gets started. To date, Kickstarter has helped fund more than 25,000 projects, with $75 million pledged.  According to the organization, Technology Pioneers are chosen on the basis how innovative a company is, the potential impact on society, growth and sustainability, proof of concept, leadership and more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Strobe Inc. is launching a new platform that helps developers build HTML5-based Web applications for desktops, smartphones and tablets, and centrally manage them from a single interface. The launch is a major leap forward in HTML5 app development. From one interface, teams can manage code (both test code and production code), configure the app’s deployment across platforms (Web, Android, iOS, etc.), add additional services (social, push notifications, authentication, etc.), and even track analytics within an easy-to-use dashboard. In short, it’s a comprehensive platform that makes building apps with Web technologies, like HTML5 and JavaScript, not just possible, but easy, straightforward and fast. The company was co-founded by Ruby on Rails Core Team member Carl Lerche, Ruby on Rails, jQuery and SproutCore Core team member Yehuda Katz, and Charles Jolley, formerly the JavaScript Frameworks Manager for Apple. At Apple, Jolley worked on Apple’s Web products like MobileMe and iCloud. He’s also the creator of the open source JavaScript framework, SproutCore, which powered Apple’s Web services and is now a key part of the Strobe platform. In addition to SproutCore, Strobe also uses PhoneGap, the popular HTML5 app platform. PhoneGap lets developers author apps using Web technologies then deliver them in a native wrapper to the iTunes App Store, Android Marketplace and other app stores. It also happens to integrate nicely with SproutCore. Update: To be clear, Strobe works with any HTML5 framework, not just SproutCore.  What Strobe Offers Now vs. What’s Coming Soon Although the Strobe platform aims to offer a complete set of tools for building apps and deploying them across platforms, while in beta testing, some of Strobe’s features are still limited. For example, the analytics product is coming in a few weeks and the only mobile platforms supported at this time are iOS and Android. Also, the social addon, which lets developers add Facebook and Twitter sharing features to their apps, is the only one available now. But these are only temporary restrictions. Strobe already has plans for more platforms on its roadmap, and will soon launch addons for authentication, push notifications and persistence (data-saving). In some cases, Strobe will write the addons itself, but in other cases, it will partner with service providers. Although no deals have been confirmed at this time, backend-as-a-service providers like Parse and StackMob immediately come to mind as good fits for Strobe integration. Using Strobe To Improve App Discovery By combining an app’s desktop Web version with its native version (built with Web technologies), Strobe isn’t just simplifying the development, deployment and tracking of apps, it’s also opening up more mechanisms for discovery too. Strobe developers can configure the Web version of an app to point to the native app, in order to help convert the app’s casual users in more engaged native apps users who are more likely to spend money on virtual goods and upgrades.  Also, by typing the two experiences of native and Web together, the Strobe social addon can be configured to help users share exact points within a mobile game, for example, which anyone on the Web could click on via a shared link, and immediately play.  That’s potentially a discovery tool more powerful than rankings, press releases, blog posts, recommendation engines or monetization schemes. Discovery, which is one of the toughest challenges the app industry has ever faced, is the ultimate end game for Strobe, and the HTML5-powered apps it helps build. The Strobe developer preview is now open and pricing info is available here. Strobe previously raised $2.5 million Series A in December, led by O’Reilly AlphaTech and Hummer Winblad. It will raise another round closer to the time of its public launch, planned for later this fall. Latest headlines delivered to you daily LinkedIn has taken a number of deep data dives on the profile information of its 120 million members to highlight trends. The company has compared men and women networkers, professional names and more. Today, the company has focused on examining the profiles of entrepreneurs, and sifted through its millions of public profiles, to analyze tens of thousands startup founder profiles on the site. Here’s how LinkedIn evaluated and separated the data. Linkedin considered professionals as Startup Founders if they identified themselves as founders (or co- founders) of U.S. companies created after 2000, with a LinkedIn company profile, and that currently have between 2 – 200 employees. LinkedIn excluded small law, consulting and realestate firms, as well as LLCs (the pool ended up with over 13,000 entrepreneurs). LinkedIn then compared founders them with the average LinkedIn member and highlighted characteristics that disproportionately appear among startup founders. As you can see from the infographic, the data shows that the most represented business schools amongst founders are Stanford, Harvard and MIT Sloan taking the top spots. In particular, the most popular subjects entrepreneurs chose to study in college were technical majors (except civil engineering), with nursing and administration as the least popular areas of study.  According to LinkedIn, founders of semiconductor and pharmaceutical startups usually have previous industry experience, while founders of retail, consumer goods, leisure & travel and professional training companies don’t. Most the founders who had academia in their work history founded startups in the nanotech, biotech and medical device industries.  In terms of the distribution of founders’ age at their first startup, LinkedIn’s data shows that 65% of entrepreneurs are 30 and older and only 2% are serial entrepreneurs. The top regions where startup founders are based are New York, California, Utah and Colorado.  The companies that are most likely to appear on founders’ profiles aren’t too surprising and include Adobe, Apple, eBay (including PayPal), Electronic Arts, Google, Microsoft, SGI andYahoo. In terms of LinkedIn network connections, founders are also disproportionately connected to venture capitalists, bloggers and recruiters.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – After just having raised a ton of money ($165 million in venture capital in its first institutional funding round since its inception), online home-goods retailer CSN Stores is today consolidating its 200+ shopping sites into a single ecommerce website under one brand: Wayfair.com. The rebranding has long been rumored, and the company publicly stated that it would be consolidating its sites and changing its name to Wayfair.com when the massive financing round was announced, but today sees the actual launch of the new “mega-site”. Wayfair.com launches with more than 4.5 million items from 5,000 brands on sale, ranging from furniture to lighting, cookware and other home and office goods. So wave goodbye to CSN Stores’ 200+ sites, some of which are actually really strong brands on their own: stores like Cookware.com, Luggage.com, Strollers.com, and BedroomFurniture.com will all be redirected to the new site and branded and marketed under the Wayfair.com umbrella as from today. Niraj Shah, CEO and cofounder of CSN Stores, tells me the company will keep the domain names for a period of time during the transition, but that they’ll consider selling them off when the time is right (meaning when traffic drops down low enough for the extra visitors not to matter all that much anymore). CSN Stores, now Wayfair.com, is a major ecommerce player any way you slice it, even though you may never have heard of it. In fact, the company is on track to register $500 million sales this year alone, up from $383 million in 2010. Its staff has more than doubled in the past two years, jumping from 400 to more than 850 employees today. The company plans to hire as many as 200 additional people by year’s end, bringing the total number to more than 1,000. The company was founded in 2002 and its main offices are in Boston, Massachusetts. So why the change to Wayfair.com? Primarily for obvious branding reasons: the company has long been spending a huge amount of money on marketing a lot of separate websites, and now they can focus on advertising just one. Well maybe three: the company’s current brands AllModern and flash sales site Joss & Main will remain alongside Wayfair.com. Other reasons for the consolidation of the separate shopping site are search engine optimization – which was apparently much needed after Google’s recent Panda update – and the fresh ability to make recommendations to shoppers based on their collective purchase history. The whole redevelopment operation took 18 months (and the consolidation will take another 3 to 6 months to complete), and Shah tells me a huge chunk of the $165 million in financing that was recently secured will be going to ‘aggressively’ marketing and building the new brand. So, what do you think?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Next Jump CEO Charlie Kim wants you to earn and burn his company’s WOWPoints, a loyalty reward currency that can be used to pay for real merchandise.  WOWPoints are redeemable for thousands of offers on Next Jump’s OO.com  at a rate of one penny per point.  Since it launched WOWPoints two years ago, more than 1.6 billion have been burned.  Currently, people are burning WOWPoints at the rate of 100 million a month, which translates to $1 million worth of discounts every month across thousands of products not only on OO.com, but also on corporate rewards sites which Next Jump operates.   Next Jump is making it easer to earn points with a concept called Family Points, which lets families pool their points together to encourage even bigger purchases.  That could come in handy for travel discounts.  The points can be applied to any offer across the various marketplaces Next Jump operates, including daily deals from LivingSocial.  But the points aren’t really about daily deals, they are more about loyalty. A daily deal is usually an attempt to acquire new customers by offering a huge discount.  Points can also be seen as discounts, but at a smaller scale.  Instead of a 50 percent discount, WOWPoints typically amount to a 2 to 3 percent discount, sometimes as high as 10 percent.  Kim believes there is aplace for daily deals, but that the vast majority of deals should be smaller rewards for loyalty.  “Profits come with loyal customers and it is the hardest thing to build,” he notes. The idea behind WOWPoints is a loyalty reward system that works across merchants.  As Next Jump adds new ways to earn points, more people are using them. The points drive the purchase loop and the company hopes will make them loyal to OO.com or other Next Jump properties.  For more background on Next Jump, read this post. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In what marks its first expansion abroad, Hulu is now available in Japan.  As expected, the video streaming service will offer both TV shows and movies across various devices for a subscription of about $20 a month (1,480 Yen).  Unlike in the U.S., where there are both free and premium versions, in Japan the service will be subscription-only. And it will cost more than twice as much as Hulu Plus does in the U.S (which is only $8 a month).  Is Hulu charging so much because it thinks it can get away with a higher subscription fee in Japan or did it have to pay through the nose for international licensing rights and has no other choice? Hulu will stream American shows in both English and Japanese from CBS, NBC, and ABC, as well as movies such as Pirates of the Caribbean, Armageddon, Men in Black, and Troy.  Hulu plans to add Japanese-produced shows and moveis as well.  (It is rather surprising they are not launching with any Japanese content partners, but those are supposedly coming). Along with the launch, Hulu is also announcing an exclusive mobile partnership with NTT Docomo, the largest mobile carrier in Japan.  The subscription covers viewing on smartphones and tablets, as well as computers, connected TVs, and through videogame consoles. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kai-Fu Lee has a fairly unique perspective on the tech industry, having spent years in high roles at Apple, Microsoft, and Google. Lee spent six years as VP of Apple’s Interactive Media Group, before moving on to be chosen as the guy to forge first Microsoft’s and then Google’s inroads into China. Then, in mid-2009, Lee left Google (where the former professor and computer scientist had been involved with Google.cn and beyond for over four years) amidst the growing criticism in Western media of China’s Internet policy, specifically in regards to the Golden Shield, or the Great Firewall of China, as it is fondly known. Lee bowed out of Google seemingly at just the right time to turn his focus from the behemoths to the little guys, founding Innovation Works, an early-stage incubator for Chinese startups. Since 2009 the incubator has been solely focused on investing in and coaching young entrepreneurs in the Chinese market, and today the incubator announced that it has raised $180 million to create the so-called “Innovation Works Development Fund” (IWDF). The fund is the first dollar-based fund raised by the company to be focused on Chinese Internet startups.  According to Innovation Works’ announcement, corporations, family funds, and institutions participated in the fund, including investors like WI Harper, Silicon Valley Bank, Sequoia Capital, IDG-Accel, Foundation Capital, Foxconn, SAP, Bertelsmann, Motorola, Autodesk, and pension funds from the U.S. and Canada. Ron Conway and Yuri Milner were also part of the list of investors, as well as executives and former executives from top Internet companies like Google, YouTube, Facebook, Amazon, and Yahoo. While American tech companies have largely struggled to expand into the Chinese market, it’s nice to at least see American money working its way into China to support startups and the local entrepreneurial ecosystem. Hopefully, it will encourage Chinese founders to build businesses unique to the region and not Facebook/Twitter ports. The incubator had previously raised $115 million and, to date, Innovation Works has invested in approximately 34 startups, nine of which have successfully obtained sizable Series A financing from third-party VCs, according to Lee. Innovation Works, like its American brethren TechStars and Y Combinator looks to help early-stage startup teams grow quickly with the help of mentoring services and an infusion of cash. Lee manages the fund alongside WI Harper Group. For more, check out Innovation Works at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Assistly, the cloud-based customer support platform that’s backed by Bullpen Capital, Index Ventures, Salesforce, as well as several other angels and VCs, launched version 2.0 of its platform back in July, along with rolling out a new pricing model that includes a full-featured version of its service for free. Today, the summer features keep on rolling out for Assistly, which today announced that it would be adding two-way integration with Salesforce. Assistly for Salesforce is an AppExchange app that, according to the Assistly blog, will enable sales and support teams to “share a complete view of the customer” — in other words, customer support teams can now see data, like customer contact info and status while working on cases — direct from Salesforce. The app will also integrate with Salesforce Chatter to make it easy to involve one’s entire company in customer support, and allow users to send status updates and set rules to automatically generate Chatter messages as customer support cases age. With Assistly for Salesforce, users can view contact history and more without having to leave Assistly, and likewise, customer support teams can view information from Salesforce — all in an effort to offer a more consistent experience to the customer. Organizations can then use Assistly to show where a customer is in the sales cycle, the status or value of that customer to the company, and the customer’s contact information. In realtime. Assistly has had an ongoing partnership with Salesforce, and this announcement is a logical extention of the strategic investment Salesforce has made in Assistly — and shows yet another partnership forged by Salesforce to continue adding products and services that complement its existing service.  Since launching in September of last year and taking on new capital, Assistly has brought on companies like Yelp, Etsy, 37signals, Pandora, Vimeo, and Spotify as paying customers. The startup also counts Mark Cuban and David Liu as advisors. For more, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily We first covered Game Closure this spring when it opened its private beta to the world to test out its new cross-platform HTML5 game engine and SDK. The startup has since gone on to work with multiple private and public partners to bring cross-platform, multiplayer HTML5 games to the App Store, Android Marketplace, Facebook, and beyond. According to Game Closure Co-founder and CEO Michael Carter, the startup has also attracted interest in its technology from game studios involved in the Project Spartan launch and expects activity to ramp up after project details are (expected to be) announced at F8 next month.  Game Closure’s new game development environment and SDK makes it easy to create, host, and deploy HTML5-based cross-platform, multiplayer games, starting with iOS, Android, and Facebook. This along with the interest the startup has had from game studios led to its quiet announcement today that it has raised its first round outside of investment. While the founders are being tight-lipped about the actual numbers, the list of investors is certainly impressive. Investors and angels participating in the startup’s seed round include, SV Angel, Yuri Milner, Joi Ito, Charles River Ventures, Benchmark Capital, Greylock Partners, and General Catalyst Partners. With advisors like Joi Ito, who was on the board of Japanese gaming giant DeNA during it’s primary growth phase, and currently advises Zynga and Twitter, (and runs the MIT Media Lab), Game Closure is starting to add some important pieces that will set it in good stead as it scales. What’s more, the startup is beginning to swim in a hot market. Single player games are beginning to experience distribution pressure from competitive games that launch on multiple platforms, as seen in Zynga’s recent Word’s with Friends cross-promotion to desktop, a play that has already moved 11 million MAU from a previously mobile-only title onto desktop Facebook.  This trend is already resulting in game studios work to launch titles which are interoperable with Google, Apple, Facebook, and every other platform. At the least, this is something Facebook fears, as evidenced by their terms of service changes regarding cross-promotion, though for now Facebook still allows publishers to cross promote from the web canvas to 1st-party games on iOS (with which developers are currently finding great success).  In light of all this, Game Closure is going after speed of execution as its main target, as Carter said that the company prides itself on its SDK’s ability to turn an idea into a game in under 2 weeks, without having to worry about the so-called “platform wars”.  Also of note: Game Closure is an entrepreneuers-in-residence company for the StartX Stanford Accelerator (formerly SSE Labs), and will be presenting at StartX’s upcoming demo day, where the Stanford accelerator’s portfolio of thirteen summer session companies will be unveiled. For more on Game Closure, check ’em out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In June, we covered the launch of Impermium, a young startup aimed at zapping the Internet’s social spam wherever it hides. Not only is the startup bringing the heat to user generated spam like spammy comments, hacked accounts, and fraudulent registrations, but the startup also happens to be founded by Mark Risher, Yahoo’s former “Spam Czar”, as well as former Yahoos Vish Ramarao and Naveen Jamal. These guys have significant experience fighting spam, part of the reason they’ve already signed on investors like  Accel Partners, AOL Ventures, Charles River Ventures, Freestyle Capital, Greylock Discovery Fund and Morado Ventures. But the real fight that Impermium wants to help companies wage is the one against social spam — the spam that is proliferating on Facebook, Twitter, Google+, and social networks near you. As we wrote last month, via Blue Coat’s nifty infographic, malware networks are becoming increasingly dynamic and continue to wreak havoc on search engines, email, and everything in between. Spam, too, is on the rise — and this is no longer your father’s spam. While Impermium is a web security and spam detection startup first and foremost, Risher said that in this new era of social spam, a new standard is needed. What he means is that, in the days of yore, web security companies held their cards close to their chest — when a new bot, form of malware, or spam was detected, white hats kept these discoveries (and their prescriptions) to themselves, hoping to become the star sheriff (and biggest moneymaking outfit) in town. More collaboration among web security companies, social networks, and data collectors is no doubt needed, and while this isn’t a call to make all identified spammers, malware creators, and so on known widely to the public (because they’ll just change tactics), a revision of policy certainly seems in order. So, as part of this effort, Impermium is creating a resource for regularly published data on social web spam and abuse trends. Today, Impermium is announcing the inaugural Social Spam Index, which will include quarterly reports based on the data it collects from its customers and daily spam hunting. The first report is based on a 100-day sample of the social web (between June and August) that analyzed 104 million pieces of user generated content (UGC) on social networks, blogs, and social bookmarking sites from a base of 90 million users across 72 countries. (Impermium currently counts  Livefyre, Posterous, Formspring and Bebo among its early customers.) Impermium’s new index has identified some interest — if not disturbing — trends in social spam that show that web businesses that depend on public user profiles are at significant risk in today’s web. What does that mean specifically? Well, for starters there’s this eye-opening statistic: As much as 40 percent of public accounts created on social networks are fraudulent. This means that many sites are overstating how many users they actually have; though fake accounts ranged from 5 to 40 percent across audited sites, with the percentage depending on the site, perceived value to spammers, and the ease of account registration. Impermium also found that so-called “sleeper cells” of social web abuse are growing fast. One if its customers experienced an attack of 30,000 fraudulent new accounts in one hour. Those accounts then posted 475,000 malicious messages to legitimate community members.  As this data shows, social media exploitation techniques are evolving fast. Nearly every large consumer brand or significant news event is exploited by spammers on the social web. The deaths of Osama Bin Laden and Amy Winehouse, in particular, became major stories that spammers used to deceive people into clicking on malicious links. Thus, spammers not only target the areas where the most people hang out, but they’re also using emotionally charged content to dupe users into clicking on their spam.  Interestingly, Uggs came in as the most exploited brand in social media channels by twice as much as the next in line, Gucci, and five times more than Prada, number three. And in the surprise of the week, porn is no longer the top source of social spam — fashion and electronics were the top two sources of spammy content, outpacing porn by 3 to 1. This may just show some very interesting trend data in web use — it appears that, for once, porn is the underdog. And sadly, it also seems that mom and pop shops have been turned and are getting into the spam game. Impermium’s report shows that small businesses have entered into social spam, reacting to the difficult economy by expanding into more illicit areas. “Most companies will be shocked to see how rampant user registration fraud is on their site”, Risher said. “Bulk accounts for most popular social networks can now be purchased on the black market for pennies. This type of fraud has many significant ramifications, including a company’s ability to accurately value its user base and determine the actual cost of new customer acquisition”. Rather than play into the real-names-only policy on Google+, the CEO continued, sites need a more flexible approach that maintains privacy without exposing them to this rampant proliferation of fake, bulk accounts. For more on the Impermium Index’s inaugural results, check out the infographic below. And for more data, visit Impermium’s blog.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Crowdbooster, a Y Combinator-backed startup, is debuting its intelligent social media optimization, monitoring and analytics platform for companies and brands. What differentiates  Crowdbooster from other monitoring platforms is that the startup’s technology works behind the scenes to understand a user’s social activity, and then makes recommendations about what to share, when, and with whom. The company’s platform will automatically surface the most popular links to share; features cross-posting to Twitter and Facebook, based on popularity and content fit; allows you to teceive alerts when influential people follow (measured by Klout); schedule Tweets and posts based on best time; respond to missed Tweets; and thank the most engaged followers. And the company’s customized recommendations surface the best content to share and suggests whento publish for maximum exposure.  The startup’s application also offers detailed analytics across Facebook and Twitter, including data around the popularity of content shared based on Retweets, Mentions, Replies,Likes, Impressions, and Comments; follower or fan growth over time; the most influential and engaged follower and more.  Crowdbooster is already being used by a number of agencies and brands including rapper LilWayne, The Los Angeles Times, Wieden+Kennedy, JetBlue, Education Week, Ben & Jerry’s, The Roxy Theatre, Crowd Surf, and Stussy. Crowdbooster is a freemium offering; the application is free for up to 3 profiles and access to enhanced recommendations and more profiles cost $20 per month.  The company has also raised a round of seed funding from Steven Chen, Esther Dyson, Nils Johnson, Charles River Ventures, Quest Venture Partners, StartupAngel, Royce Disini, Tony Pham, Brian Shire, Adora Cheung, Jonathan Pines, and Y Combinator. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Pushpins, Inc., the makers of a mobile app for saving on groceries, have launched a new service called SimpleUPC targeted towards mobile app developers. SimpleUPC, which is available as an API (application programming interface), provides product information as a service for the use in mobile apps like barcode scanners, shopping lists and nutrition trackers. The API contains data on over 120,000 food, beverage, personal care and household goods from over 15,000 brands and nearly 5,000 manufacturers. Explains Jason Gurwin, Pushpins CEO, when the company was building its mobile couponing app Pushpins, it received hundreds of requests per month asking for a simple web service like this. So the Pushpins team decided to fill that need. “There are other things out there – like Google Product Search, but they return crappy information,” scoffed Gurwin. “I didn’t know that they put guns in Gerber Baby Food,” he said referring to this glaring mistake found in the data his competitors’ provided, where instead of a baby food photo, a case for handguns was pictured.  Gurwin speaks from personal experience when it comes to the difficulties in building accurate product information databases, thanks to his work with Pushpins. Now, other developers don’t have to go through the same thing he did – they can just plug into the RESTful SimpleUPC API instead. The new API includes traditional product information (UPC, manufacturer, brand, size, container), as well as nutrition facts (the entire product label) and manufacturer-approved images. To license this data from other sources, the cost is often very high (Gurwin says one company wanted $100,000 for its UPC database, for example). Generally, the data would not include nutritional info or images, either.  SimpleUPC, however, now offers more affordable options for small businesses, starting at $99/month for 50,000 searches and product info. For $249/month, you get 300K searches plus nutritional info and for $499/month, you get 500K searches, plus nutritional info and images. To showcase the API’s capabilities, the company built an iOS app called Food Fight! which is waiting App Store approval. You can also check out the SimpleUPC demo here. To sign up for SimpleUPC, visit this page on the company’s website. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Music streaming service Spotify is releasing a new API today, called ‘libspotify,’ which allows third party iOS developers to write applications for the iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad with Spotify inside the app.  And these apps can include Spotify’s catalogue of more than 15 million tracks. Libspotify for iOS is available to Spotify Premium users as of today. It’s unclear if the startup will be building a framework for Android. Unfortunately, the use of the API is for non-commercial use, so developers cannot make money off the apps that include the API (Spotify partners with certain developers for commercial use).  Spotify just launched in the U.S. a month and a half ago, and  reportedly already has more than 1.4 million users. We’ve also been told that Spotify has over 15 million (“closer to 20 million”) users in total, across Europe and the U.S.  The company also hired Zynga executive Teymour Farman-Farmaian as “Chief Acquisition & [Ad Business] Retention Officer” and Andrew Mager (from SimpleGeo) as a developer evangelist.  Clearly, Mager will be working with developers to integrate this API into third-party apps. It should be interesting to see if developers begin to integrate the service into apps, especially considering the rapid adoption of Spotify in the U.S. and Europe. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMike Lazerow on How Brands Can Utilize TwitterIn Chris Dixon’s previous Founder Stories episode with Buddy Media’s Mike Lazerow, Lazerow told Dixon that Buddy Media was “Facebook plus,” meaning Buddy Media helps brands manage consumer interaction and engagement across social media platforms, not just Facebook. In this episode, Dixon asks Lazerow what brands think of using Twitter as a platform and advertising venue in comparison to Facebook. Lazerow acknowledges that “Twitter is more of a work in progress.” He recognizes the 140-word character count limits creative content but notes that Twitter has potential. “When you look at what you can do with photos and what you can do with… the ecosystem … whether it is Twitter-Tumblr integration, Twitter-Facebook integration, you can all of a sudden … put together a scalable presence globally.” Both agree that Tumblr is also a promising platform for brands, but the jury is still out on its effectiveness.  The conversation concludes with Google+. Lazerow is not impressed.  He says that outside of a handful of people, “I know no one who is using it.” Below, Lazerow tells Dixon “I love Google for what Google does really well,” which includes search and Gmail. This being said, Lazerow doesn’t think Google+ or any similar networking site will displace Facebook which he says “connects you to people in a way that is important to you as a human being, that’s hard to engineer.” So hard to engineer in fact that Lazerow considers Facebook to be “safe forever.” Make sure to watch episodes I and II of Lazerow’s interview with Chris Dixon, and previous episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Striiv is launching a new device today that blends gaming, fitness, and more. The device itself is a little larger than an Apple Nano, and includes a high-resolution color screen. Striiv acts partly as a pedometer to track your activity and also allows you to play games, and use your activity to donate to charities.  The device, which you can attach to a keychain or to a belt, tracks simple daily interactions like walking, taking the stairs, or exercise, and each activity earns, tracks and transforms your activities into games and donations. With Striiv every step counts toward a donation to charity. At launch, Striiv is partnering with GlobalGiving to donate clean water to children in South America or a polio vaccine to a child in India.  Striiv’s games are completely powered by physical activity. In the device’s first game, MyLand, the more you move, the more your enchanted island fills with exotic wildlife and plants. More games will be added in the future. You can also unlock rewards and bonuses for simple activities like walking to lunch or taking the stairs, or crossing the Golden Gate Bridge. As for why Striiv’s founders, who both previously worked at social gaming company Booyah, decided to create and build a device as opposed to developing a native app, the startup says that they wanted to build a tracker that was ‘always on’ and could track all activity.  So the company developed a proprietary ‘TruMotion’ technology that works in the background of  the device and can sense if you are walking, running, and even climbing stairs or hiking. Additionally, Striiv comes with an web-based platform and can be connected to an online portal via a computer USB port to upgrade new applications, charities, and games, or post updates to Facebook. Striiv will be formally rolled out in mid-October, and will retail for $99. While the startup declined to give specifics about where it will be sold, it did say that Striiv has a number of high-profile national retail partnerships in place. Striiv’s co-founder David Wang says the device is focused on appealing to a mainstream audience, particularly women. He believes the combination of gaming mechanics with real world activities (with no input required) is the killer combo that can revolutionize the fitness device space. Investors seem to agree as well. The startup has raised $6 million from iD Ventures and a number of angel investors.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily RootMusic, the company behind BandPage, a platform that helps musicians make the most of their Facebook presence, has raised a Series B round of funding to the tune of $16 million after raising $2.3 million earlier this year. The financing round was led by GGV Capital with new investor Northgate Capital and existing backer Mohr Davidow Ventures participating. Since its launch – which was less than a year and a half ago – BandPage has grown to over 30 million monthly active users, making it the 6th largest overall app according to AppData. Roughly 250,000 bands from all over the globe use BandPage to enhance their Facebook presence, as do artists such as Rihanna, Katy Perry, Arcade Fire, Bon Iver and Kanye West. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMike Lazerow on Facebook’s InfluenceMike Lazerow co-founder and CEO of Buddy Media was hooked on Facebook immediately after logging onto Zuckerburg’s social media site during Facebook’s early days. In this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Lazerow discusses Buddy Media’s growth and how it coincided with Facebook launching fan pages for companies and brands. Lazerow’s team thought “companies [were] going to have to control content and need analytics behind that content … so we launched … the Facebook Page Management System.” Their idea turned out to be a goldmine. In March of 2009 Facebook Fan pages went live. A month later, Buddy Media launched its technology, and by the end of 2010 Buddy Media “just exploded” says Lazerow. Continuing on the topic of Facebook in the video below Dixon notes Facebook allows others to build on its platform while Google develops products internally. Dixon wonders if Facebook will follow Google’s playbook and if so, does this concern Lazerow? Lazerow tells Dixon that Twitter, YouTube and LinkedIn all offer growth opportunities for Buddy Media so “we are beyond Facebook, we are Facebook plus.” In addition, Lazerow doesn’t think Facebook will devote its resources to creating a brand management system. It’s just not in Facebook’s DNA, he argues. “Facebook is in the business of delivering audiences and selling ads, we really take care of how do you set up a presence on Facebook and manage a community on Facebook” explains Lazerow. Before wrapping the interview, Lazerow concludes by saying that Facebook’s brilliance lies in “knowing who they were very early on.” That is something all startups should strive for from the very beginning. Part III of Dixon’s interview with Lazerow is coming up, but until then make sure to watch Part I and past episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new daily deals site catering to the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender (LBGT) and allied communities has just launched, and it’s called Gaypon. The site provides its subscribers with daily offers from local and regional businesses  – but only those businesses known to be gay-friendly. In addition, Gaypon says a portion of its proceeds will be donated to local and national LGBT organizations and charities. Initially, you might imagine this site is just the latest to jump on the daily deals bandwagon. But in actuality, it’s introducing a new take on the Groupon model: daily deals for a cause. Gaypon is a valid attempt at creating a groundswell of community support for local businesses that have demonstrated a desire for equality in all their business practices by rewarding them with new customers. Before becoming a Gaypon merchant, businesses are put through a background check of sorts, where they are investigated for any bad marks, like complaints of discrimination from customers and employees, poor hiring practices, etc. Gaypon says it also uses various tools, like the Human Rights Campaign’s “Corporate Equality Index” that rates American workplaces on gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender equality. Gaypon plans to donate a portion of proceeds to charitable organizations, and those that support the gay community, like The Trevor Project, which focuses on crisis and suicide prevention amongst LGBTQ youth, and Affirmations, which is one of the largest LGBT community centers in the United States. The exact percentage of those donations, however, is unclear. The site promises that your personal data is kept private, too. It’s never sold or handed over to the merchant (unless shipping is involved) and purchases on your credit card appear only as “deal purchase.” That last bit alone proves that we still have far to go as a society in terms of acceptance and tolerance for others. After all, why else would you need to hide that you’re supporting a gay-friendly company? By the way, Gaypon isn’t just for the LGBT and Allied communities – it’s for anyone who wants to support local businesses that stand up for equality. Gaypon was founded by Robert Graham, of Clear Channel Radio, and Jason Buszta. It’s based in West Bloomfield, Michigan, which is where the majority of the deals are now located. Deals are forthcoming in NYC, Atlanta, San Francisco, Chicago, San Diego and Phoenix, says Graham. Gaypon’s funding comes from individual donors who wish to remain anonymous.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily So long, Twezr, it’s been fun. The mobile social contacts application Twezr is being shut down after having a fairly well-received launch back in November 2010. The app, for those unaware, was based on a great idea: it was a social address book. It aggregated all the activity from your phone’s contacts (e.g., phone calls, SMS’s, voicemails) alongside their social networking activity (e.g., Facebook and Twitter updates) Now the company is removing its app from the iTunes App Store and working to build a new location-based photo sharing app called Spotpix instead. Says the company, Spotpix “has a great potential to solve some real world problems.” That’s probably a bit much, considering that the app seems to just involve geo-tagging photos so you can remember the places you’ve been. Yep, never seen that before. Sadly, Twezr was actually the more promising of the two concepts. By combining a contact’s phone-based activity alongside social updates, it could function as sort of a social CRM for everyday users. So what went wrong? Well, for starters, at launch, the app didn’t use OAuth standards to gain access to your social services, and actually asked users for their Gmail, Facebook and Twitter passwords. That’s a big no-no. Also, from personal experience, the app struggled to load large address books. It crashed, too. Maybe solving the real, “real world problem” of building the next great social address book (I’ve yet to find an app that really shines here, although Friends came close), was too much for a small team. Photo-sharing may be more Twezr’s speed. Here’s the letter Twezer emailed its users: Dear Twezr User,  Over the past few months we’ve been developing Spotpix, a very interesting location based photo sharing app. Spotpix has a great potential to solve some real world problems. As we’re a small startup with limited resources, we’ve decided to focus on Spotpix and withdraw Twezr from the app store and shut down Twezr service over the next few days. We regret the inconvenience. We hope you’ll find another personal organizer app that closely matches your needs to replace Twezr or switch back to the native apps.  We hope you’ll try out Spotpix when we launch. You can sign up for early access (http://spotpix.me) and also follow Spotpix on Twitter (http://twitter.com/#!/spotpixapp) to stay tuned.  Sincerely,  Team Twezr  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Woozworld, a developer of a social game / virtual world for tweens (kids aged 9-14, more specifically), has raised $6 million in new funding from Telesystem and iNovia Capital along with unnamed angel investors. In addition, Bernard Gershon, former general manager and senior vice president of Disney, has joined the startup’s board. The capital will be used to expand Woozworld’s services to include mobile platforms and boost its marketing efforts to grow reach.  Woozworld essentially offers an online, user-generated social platform, where tweens build entire worlds to engage with their peers, build virtual businesses or set up restaurants, hotels and games as they choose. To date, the company has registered more than 7 million avatars, and more than 14 million virtual spaces were created in 18 months. Woozworld is growing liked a weed, too: its user base has more than tripled over the last six months. Woozworld says it currently receives more than 15 million monthly unique visitors from over 180 countries, and logs more than 76 million monthly page views Gershon, who is joining Woozworld’s board of advisors, is considered a pioneer of streaming media and currently the president of GershonMedia, a digital media strategy practice.   He was also the Senior Vice President and General Manager, Corporate Strategy, Business Development and Technology, atThe Walt Disney Company.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily E la Carte, a company that develops a tableside tablet for the restaurant and related hospitality industries, has raised $4 million in funding from Lightbank, the venture fund created by Groupon co-founders Eric Lefkofsky and Brad Keywell. The Y Combinator-backed startup previously raised more than $1 million from angel investors including SV Angel, Dave McClure, Joshua Schachter, Roy Rodenstein, and Skip Sack, a former board member and SVP at Applebee’s chain of restaurants. As we’ve written in the past, E la Carte launched ‘Presto,’ earlier this year to bring user-friendly tablets to restaurants to bring efficiency to the tableside and ordering experience. The 7-inch tablet includes a digital menu that lets you sift through the restaurant’s food and drink selection via photos and detailed descriptions using a touch-screen interface. There’s also a section for Games, including trivia and a drawing app. And, finally, there’s a tab for paying. Presto tablets have a full-day battery life, a credit card reader and sit comfortably and on restaurant tables. The tablets have also been designed for the tableside experience, and are more rugged than iPads. Similar to shopping for items in an online store, the Menu feature of Presto lets eaters pick which items they’d like to order and uses a shopping cart system so you can order multiple things at once. You can also filter menus by eating preferences (vegetarian, chicken-only, food allergy) and you can also manually type in food instructions. And Presto shows nutritional information for each dish. Once you click ‘order’ on the tablet, your selections will wirelessly sent to the kitchen (E la Carte integrates with the major POS systems) — and it will even give you an estimate on how long you’ll have to wait for your food. In the mean time you can start playing games or talk with your friends, which is especially useful when you are with children at a restaurant. Once it comes time to pay, E la Carte’s software allows uses to split the tab, pay for certain items and more. The tablet comes with a card swiper, so you simply swipe your card, enter how much of a tip you want to leave (there are buttons for 15%, 20%, and so on), and Presto will actually email you your receipt. Founder Rajat Suri tells us that since the launch in April, E La Carte has signed up close to 100 eateries with a waiting list of another 150. Early E la Carte-installed restaurants have enjoyed a sales increase of nearly 12 percent with national chain customers like Pizzeria Venti and Umami Burger already on board. And the startup has other high-profile deals in the works. Suri says that E la Carte isn’t aiming to replace the waiter but simple make the whole experience more efficient and to fill in the gaps in tableside service at a restaurant. Suri says that installations (which take around a week) can cost as low as $200 per restaurant, or has hight $600 to $700 depending on the number of tables. He adds that Presto fits the mold of casual dining, and perhaps is not as well suited for ‘white table cloth’ restaurants. As for why E la Carte didn’t just create an iPad app with similar functionality, Suri says that the device just wasn’t optimal for the company’s goals of creating a smaller, more lightweight, hearty device for tableside dining. Anecdotally, the startup actually exchanged emails with Steve Jobs when deciding whether to go iPad or build the hardware, and unsurprisingly Jobs advised them to build off the iPad and iOS platform. Lightbank partner Paul Lee says of E la Carte: “This team from MIT embraces the exact type of product innovation we are seeking to partner wit…E la Carte is already receiving rave reviews so we are excited for an opportunity to help scale their commercialization.” The new funding will be used to scale the product, for product development, and for sales and marketing support.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily PayNearMe, an alternative payments product from the company formerly known as Kwedit, provides a compelling way for the ‘unbanked’ to use cash payments for online goods. The “unbanked” refers to consumers who don’t have traditional bank accounts or cannot qualify for credit cards. PayNearMe allows people who don’t have or don’t want to use credit or debit cards to purchase products, pay for bills and more with cash at thousands of 7-Eleven stores in the continental U.S. And today, PayNearMe is announcing it’s first implementation of its utility bill product the City of Fairfield, Calif. Here’s how PayNearMe works. With participating partners, e-commerce or merchant sites, consumers can use the PayNearMe option to pay for purchases or debts owed. You simply place your order with PayNearMe and print out the given receipt. You then take that receipt into a 7-Eleven and they scan it and you pay in cash. Once you pay, your order with the retailer or merchant will be fulfilled. With the utility bill payments, PayNearMe partners with Fairfield billing service provider InfoSend to us PayNearMe’s Embedded Barcode Remittance (EBR) technology. With the technology InfoSend prints a unique barcode directly onto each City of Fairfield utility bill. Upon receipt of the bill, customers can go to any local 7-Eleven where their bar code is scanned at register. They complete the transaction by paying in cash. The funds immediately post to customers’ accounts, and they receive detailed receipts for proof of payment. PayNearMe says that because 7-Eleven stores are open 24 hours a day, seven days a week, Fairfield customers gain greater flexibility in how and when they pay their utility bills. And InfoSend works with 200 other utility partners, and PayNearMe plans to provide this cash payment option to these cities as well.  PayNearMe has steadily expanded the use cases for the cash payments product, recently announcing the ability for consumers to pay bills, transfer money, and even pay for a bus ticket using its payment option. And the startup says that 60 million consumers in the U.S. don’t have debit or credit cards, which is a huge market to serve.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Talk about a halo effect. Kik, a developer of cross-platform mobile communication apps, says something really strange happened when they launched their Windows Phone 7 application last June: user growth across the iOS and Android platform both accelerated significantly. Turns out every registered user of the Windows Phone 7 Kik Messenger app is ‘worth’ 2.53 users (see explanation on methodology and accompanying image below). Windows Phone’s market share may be low (according to Millennial Media, only about 2 percent of the U.S. market – PDF) but for venture capital-backed Kik, it was definitely worth launching on the platform. According to the company, Android and iOS user growth was actually 22 percent higher than anticipated following the launch of the WP7 app. What Kik did to come up with the numbers was tracking the average user growth on iOS and Android for five weeks before the Windows Phone 7 Kik Messenger launch on June 28, 2011, and subsequently comparing this trend to the month following the launch. The company found that, in addition to the expected average growth on Android and iOS, the platforms were experiencing that 22 percent bonus in growth as a result of the launch. Each Windows Phone user brought an additional 1.53 users of iOS or Android, netting a total of 2.53 registered Kik users. Concludes Kik Interactive CEO Ted Livingston: “Windows Phone users may be a small segment of the whole, but they bring with them all their friends on other mobile platforms, creating a huge and unanticipated spike in Kik activity. It’s time for cross-platform apps to start paying attention to Windows Phone 7.” Who would’ve thought?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Assumptions are rarely safe. But I’m sure most of you will come with me when I go out on a limb to say that, by and large, kids love toys. Yep. And they also love cartoons. This has been true as long as either have been around, however, a more recent taste to trend among the world’s wee ones: Love for the iPad. Some even said it was the toy of the year in 2010.  A new startup from Y Combinator’s gigantic summer batch of 63 companies launching today, called Launchpad Toys, agrees that tablets are big among kids — and that they just happen to be an incredibly effective educational tool to boot. In short, Launchpad wants to bring toys into the digital age. The startup is building a suite of apps for the iPad that allow children to create, learn, and share their ideas through games — in an effort to become “the Lego of digital play”. Through its apps, the startup aims to bring classic toys (and toy makers) like Play-Doh, Crayola, and Erector Sets to the iPad, but with an educational backdrop that is standardized and meets national educational requirements. The first piece in Launchpad’s suite is Toontastic, a game launched in January that enables kids to create and storyboard their own cartoons (choosing from a bunch of different characters and backgrounds) and even move their characters around the screen via touch and record audio to give them a voice. The goal is to help children learn about the art of storytelling, while allowing them to enjoy the fun of animating their own cartoon, before sharing it with friends and family — and even winning awards.  Toontastic has been featured by Apple four times since going live and was recently added to the App Store Hall of Fame, which in turn has seen the app attract over 40,000 paid downloads and has led to its users creating over 170,000 cartoon characters. Check out how kids react to the app here; not surprisingly, they love it. (And so do their parents, apparently, as Toontastic was the recent winner of the Parents’ Choice Award.) That’s probably because the subject matter in the app meets with late elementary-level creative writing standards, which gives parents a sense of well being while watching their young ones on an iPad — not to mention that the iPad’s multitouch functionality gives the app a collaborative spin that encourages parents to join in to play with their kids. Touchpad also creates a parent/teacher guide for its apps; check out the guide that explains some of the educational intricacies of Toontastic and how it matches up to National Standards for Creative Writing here. What’s more, Launchpad didn’t just want the user experience to be limited to the standalone app, so the team created ToonTube, a global story-telling network, which allows kids to share the stories they’ve created on Toontastic with their family and other kids from over 100 countries. Users can browse the network from within the app, vote on the cartoons they like best, and interact with other kids. If a cartoon attracts more than 8 “likes”, then the creator of the cartoon earns a badge, while each badge collected unlocks new characters that can be used in stories. The Launchpad team, headed by co-founders Andy Russell and Thushan Amarasiriwardena (who hail from prior lives at Hasbro and the Boston Globe, respectively) said that they’ve tried to take a specific educational subject matter — in the case of Toontastic, it’s creative writing and storytelling — and match it with a form of play (puppets, in this case) to provide an experience that fuses non-pedantic educational material with the fun of games.  Russell also tells me that Launchpad has had some great reaction from teachers — across the U.S. — and though the startup designs its apps to be consumer-facing (not for classroom-only use), he says that touch devices give both educational and game developers an opportunity to design for schools and kids, which was previously difficult to do because of the barrier for entry involved in integrating game consoles, etc. into the classroom. Launchpad’s suite of apps will continue to be designed with the home in mind first, but the key, he says, is to tailor the experience so that it is optimized for both. In terms of the future roadmap for Launchpad: The founders said that they want to continue building apps that merge learning goals with play patterns, using this formula to expand into other verticals. They also plan to soon create a toy store to enable in-app purchases, like new characters and backgrounds.  Using the iPad’s ability to save, share, and collaborate as a launchpad, the startup is on its way to creating a new generation of early learning toys. So far, they’re off to a great start. For more on Launchpad Toys, check them out here. Let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It may not be receiving quite as much media coverage as the VMAs at the moment, but we’re all acutely aware of the fact that the economy remains in the toilet. Unemployment is still over 9 percent, and articles like this one detail just how long it takes for the average American to find a job — and that job seekers are giving up on the search after as little as 5 months. Of course, part of the problem is there just aren’t enough jobs being created, but it’s also true that the present state of job sites and marketplaces today leaves a lot to be desired. Venturocket, a job connection service based out of San Francisco, is today launching a new spin on the old model that it hopes will prove to be a more effective way to match job seekers to the right employers. With an AdWords nod, to boot. For starters, Venturocket Founder and CEO Marc Hoag says that he wants his service to dismantle the old job search standards and rebuild the model from the ground up. For Hoag, this means no more resumes, no more cover letters, and a dearth of classified ads. Out with the old, in with the new. Venturocket also does away with listing charges and membership fees — for both job seekers and employers — the startup instead only charges a small fee when an actual connection is made, i.e. the job seeker gets called in for an actual interview. As an alternative to resumes and applications, the service requires prospective employees to list their skills and proficiencies in those skills — by selecting them from a common pool of choices, removing the interference of duplications and picky search filters. But here’s where Venturocket’s model sets it apart from the rest: Job seekers actually bid on the keywords that describe their level of expertise at a particular job or skill, so that you’re in very real terms, putting your money where your mouth is. Are you an expert developer? Well, then you might say that you’re worth $20, and prospective employers pay that price to speak with you, and you pay that price in return. Essentially, Venturocket is bringing the same model Google’s AdWords uses to determine the payment structure for its ads to the job search process. It’s a different (and perhaps slightly higher method) of determining the cost-per-connection, but Hoag says that he thinks that, by having providers and seekers pay the same nominal fee, it will ensure that both parties are genuinely interested in one another — and that a connection will be made. A quality connection. Otherwise, the service is open to jobs in every sector, and is free to join, search, and use for job postings. Job skills are easily sorted and selected, serving results from commonly-used listings and related fields. Venturocket wants to eliminate your having to spam hundreds of job posts and employers with your resume and a hastily written cover letter, by allowing employers to pick only from candidates with the best skill matches, leaving job seekers to relax in knowing that they will automatically be contacted by companies — that they don’t have to waste time drafting a saccharine cover letter or prepare a professional headshot. Now, some may be put off by the fact that you have to spend money to bid for the top keywords, but as Hoag pointed out, there is generally a misconception that it’s wrong or not feasible to spend money as part of the job search. In reality, people spend a lot of money looking for work, and with Venturocket’s model, you only pay for the skills that best describe your level of expertise — and the employer pays the same to get in touch with you. Hoag said that he realizes this model may not be appealing to the top 2.5 percent of job seekers, but the other 97.5 percent of people are the ones that really need the help. Now, of course, as to the price of keywords, Adwords’ model runs the gamut from $1 to $100, and just as for Venturocket, the price of keywords is going to be determined by competition. So there’s a chance certain titles are driven up, but Hoag says that, like Adwords, he expects the average price to be far lower — under $2. One might also think that this model would find people adding hundreds of keywords to describe their levels of expertise, but Hoag says that he wants to limit these to manageable numbers to incentivize completion, so employees can enter up to 30 keywords, while employers can add up to 15. Venturocket is testing an interesting solution with its new service, and it will be really interesting to see if the Adwords model tests well in the job marketplace. The idea has some real validity to it, but can people really become comfortable with a service that circumvents the traditional job assets like resumes and cover letters and replaces them with keyword bidding?  Chime in and let us know what you think. For more on Venturocket, check ’em out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For ticket-selling businesses, nothing beats “sold out”. But whether or not a flight sells all of its tickets, or a sports team fills their stadium, the show must go on. Businesses with perishable inventory stand to gain the most from the daily deals model, and those that can make money on complementary goods (creating purchases that make up for revenues lost in offering the discount) can often break even — take movie theaters or sports venues, for example. This is where a company called Goldstar enters the field. Goldstar is membership-based website for half-price live entertainment tickets, that allows venues to unload their extra tickets, make some additional revenue, and generate word-of-mouth marketing. Goldstar, which currently has relationships with more than 5,000 venue-partners around the country (from Cirque du Soleil and Ticketmaster to the San Francisco Giants) and counts Matt Coffin, Emmy Award-winning actor Neil Patrick Harris, and former Ticketmaster CEO Sean Moriarty as members of its advisory board, wants to avoid just becoming the “Groupon for entertainment tickets”. To differentiate its model from the likes of Groupon and LivingSocial, Goldstar avoids splitting revenues with merchants and instead monetizes by taking a cut of the service charge on each ticket sold ($4.50 on average), allowing entertainment venues — or the shows themselves — to take home the full cost of each ticket sold.  So far, this model has been working for the entertainment ticket site, as Goldstar recently announced that it has sold its five millionth ticket and now has over 2 million members in more than 20 major U.S. markets. The site now offers 1,200 to 1,500 half-priced tickets each day.  Of course, as anyone who has taken advantage of ticket discounts knows — while the simple gratification of scoring a deal on tickets is all well and good, we want to be able to go to a movie or a show and sit with our friends. Unseat.me, for example, attacks this friend problem by allowing season ticket holders to offer their tickets to friends before selling them to anonymous folks on StubHub.  And today, Goldstar is announcing its own solution designed to allow ticket buyers and vendors to tackle this problem with its “Sit With Friends” feature. Goldstar’s new patent-pending feature allows Goldstar members who buy tickets to receive a personalized link that they can then share with friends via email or their social network of choice. Users can use that link to purchase tickets to the same event and get automatically seated with their friends. With five million tickets sold, Goldstar has come a long way since it sold its first batch of tickts to a horse ballet in Pasadena back in 2003. The company has never accepted outside investment, yet has managed to stay profitable — with a sales staff of only a dozen employees. Goldstar CEO Jim McCarthy says that the key to resisting large sales forces a la Groupon has been to cultivate their existing relationships with venues and shows, rather than focus on closing new merchants who may never use the site again. In terms of the future roadmap, McCarthy says that Goldstar is looking to expand into new cities across the U.S., and improve on its core technology, building out new features like Sit With Friends that encourage people to get out to see live entertainment — in spite of a tight economy. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social application developer Seesmic is making a big move into the social enterprise and is debuting a dedicated Android app and iPad app for Salesforce’s CRM product (Windows Phone 7 will also be added soon), called Seesmic CRM. The Android app will be launched tomorrow morning at Salesforce’s annual conference, Dreamforce, and Seesmic will launch the iPad app in a few weeks. For background, Seesmic, which was founded by French entrepreneur Loic Le Meur, helps you monitor and track the social web. Seesmic’s desktop, web, and mobile clients integrate with Twitter, Facebook and other social networks. The bonus of using an app like Seesmic is the ability to aggregate your streams from a number of social web services, like YouTube, Foursquare, Techmeme, LinkedIn and others. But of late, Seesmic has been dabbling in the enterprise and launching more business-focused features. Last Fall, Seesmic launched a deep integration with Salesforce’s social network for the enterprise, Chatter. And then earlier this year, Salesforce led a $4 million round in Seesmic. Basically the Seesmic CRM Android and iPad apps bring all the functionality of Salesforce’s CRM to mobile phones. Users can search their Salesforce.com account from the native apps; look up leads, contacts, accounts, related activities and chatter newsfeeds on the go; create and update leads, contacts, tasks, and events; log calls and emails after meetings; and much more. And the apps leverage the mobile OS; allowing users to see maps of their leads respective to their current location; upload photos and more. While pricing hasn’t been announced yet, Seesmic may charge $10 per month per user for the apps. Le Meur tells us that he isn’t competing with Salesforce because the CRM giant currently doesn’t offer in-depth Android and iPad apps. In fact, Seesmic has been working ‘hand in hand’ with Salesforce’s mobile team to develop these native apps. And Salesforce is particularly bullish on the social enterprise of late—’Welcome To The Social Enterprise’ is the theme of Dreamforce this year. As Le Meur says, “We are working with Salesforce, not competing with the company.” Of course, it is interesting that a Twitter-platform developer is shifting focus away from building for the consumer and focusing on the enterprise. In March, Twitter basically told developers to avoid competing with them on native clients. It’s not that Twitter doesn’t want developers to build off their platform, they just don’t want developers to build clients that mimic Twitter’s own services. Thus, Seesmic has found a new user base in businesses. Le Meur explains that bringing mobile and social to the enterprise is the future for Seesmic. While the startup won’t give up its web and mobile apps (the company’s Android app has over a million users); all of Seesmic efforts are now fully ‘focused on bringing social to business users,’ says Le Meur. Seesmic also shuttered its BlackBerry app a few months ago. You can watch Le Meur’s recent conversation with TechCrunch TV’s Andrew Keene here. (Disclosure: TechCrunch editor Michael Arrington was an early investor in Seesmic.) Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s not easy being green — or an entrepreneur. The inherent risk in becoming an entrepreneur or founding a startup is high. Sleepless nights, sweat equity, bribing new users to come to your product — it’s all part of the nerve-racking, code-spinning, and teeth grinding process. That’s why most of these swashbucklers are pirates by nature. But the truth of the matter is that few startups ever make it far enough to find the buried treasure or piggyback on Facebook all the way to glory; in fact, the cold, hard reality is that more than 90 percent of all startups fail. That’s why four young international entrepreneurs (Bjoern Herrmann and Max Marmer) created the so-called Startup Genome Report, because they wanted to a deep dive into what makes a startup successful — and what causes so many to drink from the cup of FAIL. The 67-page report, created in collaboration with researchers from Stanford and Berkeley, has collected data from 3,200 startups to date in order to work towards laying the foundation for a new framework for assessing startups more effectively — by measuring the thresholds and milestones of development that early stage web companies move through. (Read our initial coverage of the Startup Genome Report here.) The report, which brought a comprehensive and scientific approach to the analysis of startup trends, was a success; it was downloaded 15,000 times and covered in more than 150 publications in 20 different languages. But perhaps more importantly, the report (and subsequent data added by new companies and entrepreneurs) has already begun to show some interesting results — that can actually benefit the very people they analyze. Namely, Co-founder Bjoern Lasse Herrmann tells me, the number one cause of startup failure: Premature scaling.  Herrmann said that the team’s research found that of the 90 percent of startups that fail, 70 percent scaled prematurely, which had a sometimes subtle and sometimes dramatic effect on the success (or lack thereof) of their business. Self-destruction and not competition is the bane of most startups, it seems. So, the team behind the report, which also created a business accelerator called Blackbox (designed to leverage the data collected from their R&D projects), wanted to move beyond static reports and create a tool for startups that would help them combat this widespread problem of premature scaling. Today, the Blackbox team is releasing the “Startup Compass”, a tool built to be a prescription for premature scaling by mapping a company’s progress along “5 core interdependent dimensions”, according to Herrmann: Customers, Product, Team, Business Model and Financials. The Compass provides entrepreneurs with a dashboard to monitor their progress along these dimensions, helping them to set better priorities on a monthly basis — and also help them locate any inconsistencies in these dimensions. According to Herrmann, many startups have trouble deciding which priorities to follow, not to mention measuring their effectiveness once they do, “almost always landing in the proverbial grey zone”. He gave these questions as classic examples of startup uncertainty: “Is a 5 percent increase in retention good? Do I have enough users to declare product/market fit? Is now the right time to step on the gas pedal and scale?” The Compass, then, is a simple benchmarking tool designed to reduce this grey zone by assessing a startup’s type and stage of development, and then comparing that data to that of other startups of the same type and stage — on 25 key performance indicators — to help them get a better sense of their current location (and the efficacy of their direction).  For those looking to check out the Compass beta,  you can find it here. Blackbox is looking for feedback from entrepreneurs and founders, too, as it wants to make tools that actually benefit those out there in the wild and woolly world of entrepreneurism — not just the researchers. This is a collaborative project, Herrmann says, and one that can have real effects with the more data it collects.  Readers that want to check out Blackbox’s mini report “Startup Genome Report Extra: Premature Scaling” can find it here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily ModoPayments’ simple and comprehensive solution for providing mobile payments is interesting and what’s more, its offer-based approach may have finally cracked the code for monetizing check-ins. This is something that mobile location-based service providers (LBSs) like Foursquare, Loopt, Gowalla and ShopKick have, no doubt, been laboring over since their inceptions. And while ModoPayments is, at present, a non-NFC mobile payments platform, they plan to integrate with NFC too, when NFC reaches retail maturity. Based in Dallas, Texas and led by CEO Bruce Parker, ModoPayments is a startup with a goal to do exactly what their tagline says – “convert redemptions to payments and make payments mobile”. What exactly does that mean? First, know that ModoPayments definitely has a payments piece and I’ll come to that in a moment, but a supremely important part of their business plan is creating and tying value offers to the purchases they enable in order to enhance and promote their mobile payments solution. They create monetary savings that users can cash in on if they transact with ModoPayments instead of another tender. It has often been stated that mobile payments are a solution searching for a problem. Indeed, what is the big deal about pulling a card out of your wallet vs. pulling your phone out of your pocket, to transact? Where is the value to drive the mobile payment other than convenience? Modo thinks it has to do with offers and they have integrated a framework for redeeming merchant offers with their payments platform. This makes sense to me. If I had to choose between paying with my Visa card in my wallet or my Visa on my phone (that also happens to give me a big discount on the purchase) I think the choice is obvious. So right out of the gate, ModoPayments has tied a distinct consumer value proposition to their service in order to drive usage (they hope). Google Wallet has a similar concept. It will definitely be a motivator. The platform makes it possible to, in the words of Bruce, “generate a mobile payment transaction at any location that accepts either Visa or MasterCard with no change to POS and no change to the phone that uses ModoPayments.” It can exist as an SMS or native app solution; customers can choose either touchpoint. I’ve heard this one before, but their scenario is really simple and honestly sounds like it might work. HOW DOES IT WORK? First, a customer creates an account at the ModoPayments website and registers a credit card with that account. When it later comes time to pay for something at a participating location, the customer texts “VISIT” to the Modo short code or else they check-in with the Modo native app. (In the text scenario, Modo will try to triangulate on a customer’s network location. If they can’t locate them, ultimately they will just ask the customer via text—‘are you at X location’ and via process of elimination, locate them). After Modo have verified that the location matches up with a supporting offer, they will create a randomized credit account number for that location which is good for one transaction only. They then load it with money that the merchant or other 3rd party has set aside for the specific offer. Next, they will grab the difference still needed to complete the sale from the customers registered credit card. In essence, they are creating pre-paid card numbers that will only work for a limited time and that are loaded with money from both the offer provider and the customer. Then, they send half of the account number to the merchant and half of the number to the customer. The two sides combine their numbers to create the actionable account number to complete the transaction. (The merchant half of the number may or may not be static and therefore might not even need to be sent). Pretty tricky. So here they have tied a distinct merchant value proposition to their service—no costly POS change required plus a mobile marketing channel.  SHOW ME THE MONEY Logistically, that is how they are enabling the mobile payment but another concept they are focused on is information sharing. Using the ModoPayments framework, users can track their entire purchase history, merchants can see anonymized purchasing trends to track/create effective offers and the location element will act as a security feature and help bolster the ability to relax chargeback percentages in order to turn those into profit. For example, normally for “card-not-present” credit transactions (like Modo’s) an extra percentage is taken from the merchant who accepts these card-less numbers as protection against fraudulent purchases in case there is a chargeback. Because ModoPayments has these sophisticated technologies that can prove exactly where a transaction is happening and by whom, and because they also control the randomized account numbers they can potentially minimize chargeback risk. This will allow them to work out acquirer relationships in such a way that they keep that usual 1% markup and turn it into profit. I am not sure how they are going to pull that off, but it’s a great idea. MONETIZE CHECK-IN I think the payments piece alone is cool and the info sharing piece is borderline scary but what I really zeroed in on is what this could mean as a payments solution that benefits the check-in concept. Customers can check-in with ModoPayments via text or native app, but Bruce said that other LBSs could also own the check-in part if they want. Modo is open to that. So here’s the thing…if pulled off correctly, this service could finally monetize check-in in a way that hasn’t happened before. Modo could provide the framework for the offer and mechanism for transacting, while the location service could act as the visible marketing channel. That extra 1% could be sliced up a few ways so everyone could get a piece of the action. Then, it just becomes a volume game. For example, a merchant has an offer and advertises that either directly though ModoPayments or within say, Foursquare. If the Foursquare check-in helps drive the offer redemption through ModoPayments, then they get a piece of that transaction, affiliate-style. It would therefore behoove Foursquare to help advertise it. This could be the part of their puzzle that has been missing and could be very attractive to the major LBSs while at the same time could help to drive ModoPayments adoption. WHAT ABOUT NFC? I’m rather pessimistic about NFC’s short term viability for completing mobile payments in the retail space. No doubt it will be a useful mechanism once the merchant value proposition is defined. As it stands, that has yet to be clarified for me, in toto. Sure, consumers want it, but is that enough of a reason to validate merchant expense incurred purchasing and installing the hardware needed, just so a small percentage of early adopter consumers can leave their wallets at home? Consumer desire is one thing but there needs to be a clear, strategic and financial value for the merchant too, especially if they are footing the bill for NFC enablement (e.g. buying hardware). It’s a big, credible expense and there are just too many unanswered questions in my mind to think that NFC payments are as close as the Google Wallet announcement would lead some to believe. Forrester’s Charles S. Golvin and Thomas Husson have said that “Relying on an installed base of phones that is today indistinguishable from zero, a single payment system, a single card issuer, and a modest network of merchants capable of accepting these phone-based payments means that the near-term impact will be negligible.” That’s why the POS-less concept ModoPayments has put together is a great interim step. Don’t get me wrong, I think eventually NFC will embed and payments solutions will have to incorporate with it and account for it. It’s definitely one way to solve for the physical proximity needs of a mobile transaction. It’s still a couple of years away though. That’s just my opinion. And really, I’m not sure consumers care if their mobile payments solution incorporates NFC, 2D barcodes or a freakin’ chip in their butt…they just want an easy way to purchase that matches the evolving mobile lifestyle of traveling light, planning on the fly and managing on the go. It’s just how people are staring to do things. We all know this. Ok, they might actually care about a chip in their butt. You get my point though. WHAT’S NEXTModoPayments has a few pilots scheduled to launch in Dallas in the coming weeks, so we’ll hopefully be able to get a look at how this concept is playing out in the real world. I will definitely be watching for when and how those pilots work out. They will also be presenting at Finovate 2011, in New York later in September. Until then, check out their light and clever little video at modopayments.com.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Tapit is a new mobile advertising startup, founded in March 2011, that enables content sharing and offer delivery simply by tapping an NFC-enabled phone anywhere the Tapit logo can be found. The company has now raised a seed funding round from Sydney Angels in record time – just 22 days from the pitch until the round was subscribed for. This is the fastest investment to date for Sydney Angels, the not-for-profit membership organization for angels which typically invests in Sydney-based startups. NFC (near field communication), a short-range wireless technology, is often associated with mobile payments and mobile wallets these days, as a new way to enable purchases at point-of-sale. But that’s only one of the many possible use cases for the technology, which can also support things like sharing files and media between devices, advertising, ticketless transactions and more. It can even be used to perform actions like those found in NTT DOCOMO’s nifty “tap to follow” offering that lets two Twitter users follow each other simply by tapping phones. With Tapit, however, the idea is to leverage NFC for use in marketing campaigns by working with agencies, brands, handset manufacturers and carriers. Its marketing services include mobile commerce, coupon distribution, ticketing, surveys and reviews, content delivery, competitions and social community building (e.g. tap here to “like” us on Facebook or follow us on Twitter). The company has already been involved with several campaigns this year – one for Australian radio group Nova Radio through the JCDecaux billboard network, another for Australia’s Channel 10 TV show “Renovators,” and a third involving an NFC-based marketing within shopping centers. Says Tapit CEO Jamie Conyngham, “the speed in which this round was closed is an endorsement of the Tapit team and the business models we have created around our unique NFC enabled technology. Everyone we meet loves the idea of Tapit, it’s addictive.” NFC, indeed, would be a step up from the now-ubiquitous barcode scanning technology, which involves using smartphone apps to scan QR codes via the phone’s camera. Unfortunately, NFC generally requires an accompanying chip built into the phone itself. Due to this requirement, it’s currently being held back by the limited availability of supported handsets. Still, analysts are bullish on NFC’s future, with ABI predicting over 35 million supported handsets by 2012 and Frost & Sullivan estimating around 868 million by 2015. Terms of Tapit’s seed investment were not disclosed, but the Sydney Angels Sidecar Fund typically invests between $100K – $500K in its portfolio companies.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cisco this morning announced that it has acquired San Francisco startup Versly, a privately-held company that develops collaboration tools that integrate with Microsoft Office applications. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed, but all Versly employees will be integrated into Cisco’s Collaboration Software Group (CSG) upon the close of the acquisition. Versly builds plug-ins that enable groups of people to collaborate around content in Word documents, Excel spreadsheets, PowerPoint presentations and emails.  From the looks of it, the service was still in private beta, so this is a quick exit for Versly. Here’s how Murali Sitaram, VP and general manager, CSG, Cisco, pitches the acquisition: “Collaboration is a top priority at Cisco. With this acquisition we’re enhancing our collaboration offerings and improving the user experience by integrating social technologies within the business applications individuals and teams use at work.” Versly’s software will be integrated into offerings such as Cisco Quad, Jabber and WebEx. According to its CrunchBase profile, Versly was backed by seed funding raised from Accel Partners, Baseline Ventures, 500 Startups and a couple of angel investors, including Scott Dietzen, Kenny Van Zant, Jonathan Katzman and Rasool Rayani. The company was started by former BEA and Sun exec Benjamin Renaud and former Yahoo-er Erik Eccles. The rest of the team is detailed here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quixey, the Palo Alto-based startup that’s building a functional search engine for apps, today announced that it has closed a $3.8 million series A funding round. The investment was led by U.S. Venture Partners and WI Harper Group, with participation from Webb Investment Network alongside follow-on investment by Eric Schmidt’s Innovation Endeavors. The series A round adds to the $400K Quixey raised in April from Innovation Endeavors, bringing total investment to $4.2 million. We’ve all heard (and perhaps even mocked) the quip “there’s an app for that”. It’s actually a wonderful quality of the mobile revolution: There really is an app for just about everything you can think of, from calling a taxi to managing your schedule to scanning for skin cancer or heart murmors. But, it’s also overwhelming, and searching for the app that you want isn’t easy. There’s a lot of noise, and a lot of imperfect approaches to app search. Quixey entered the game with the intention to build a new type of search, molded specifically to the unique characteristics of searching for those ubiquitous but sometimes elusive apps. Their solution, coined “functional search”, which not only scans the major app stores, but crawls blogs, review sites, forums, and social media sites to build a truly comprehensive picture of what an app can do — through reviews, word of mouth, and demos.  Quixey’s search engine lets the user type in queries like “baseball scores”, and get a list of applications that provide just that (which they can then can filter by platform). And the best part is that the search engine suppors Windows and Mac apps, iGoogle, extensions, and more. It’s not just iOS and Android.  Though Quixey would seem to be competing with the likes of Chomp and others, the startup also has the added value proposition of being able to power search for other app stores, search engines, and websites — just like Google — to help disseminate its search engine on third party sites across the Web.  Not so surprising, then, that Eric Schmidt’s Innovation Endeavors is investing in a great app search tool. Bringing in outside info and data from blogs, review sites, and beyond, really adds an extra layer of depth to app search (especially in being platform agnostic), just as powering search across websites gives Quixey the opportunity to scale and become mixed in with the very sites it crawls. The startup will be using its new investment to continue securing partnerships with app stores and other big third party app resources, and according to the Quixey team, there are more than 25 potential partnerships in the pipeline. The more partners, the more effective the search engine becomes.  It’s an interesting new approach, this “functional search”, and from my experience thus far, works as advertised. Chime in to let us know what you think. More on Quixey here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s Note: Nina Khosla is a designer and founder of Teethie, a social blogging startup focused on building interest-based communities. You can follow her @ninakix. Over the years, there’s been a radical change in the way we interact with our networks of friends online. It used to be that we had a few of our friends (online or offline friends) on a service, allowing us to connect to friends through the Internet and see what their activities were. Where the Internet used to be a somewhat scary world full of strangers, we suddenly had friendly anchors to explore that world with. Sure, most of our friends weren’t online, or at least not using the same services, but the familiarity was comforting and the ability to see what a few of our friends were doing allowed us to find new content and new friends. We fell in love with sites that made us feel like there are people out there who are similar to us, who we are talking to and having common experiences with. But then, some of these networks — Facebook and Twitter in particular — began to grow explosively. Facebook facilitated a cultural norm of using its service to “friend” everyone we knew. All of a sudden we had tons of our friends everywhere we went. With the experiences gained sharing online spaces with a few friends, logic would dictate that having more of our friends online would make this experience richer. But that isn’t what happened. Instead, there is a new trend happening: We’re not really paying attention to our friends we’re connected to online. Take Twitter, for example. Twitter used to be a great place for many early adopters to talk tech. It wasn’t so long ago that there were few enough people on Twitter that you could read every single tweet in your stream. But as the network began to become more dense, and people found more people they knew and liked on Twitter, they began following hundreds of people, and reading all those tweets became impossible. This is such a fact of life that entire companies are based on the premise that you have too many friends on Facebook and Twitter to really pay attention to what they’re saying. For example, Flipboard, among others, highlights its abilities to share with you the best of your friends’ Twitter and Facebook posts. These companies, and even Facebook’s news feed intelligence, are helping us deal with the disconnect we have with our friends because of our connectedness—they’re sorting through the deluge of information this expanded network created for us. Therein lies the paradox of the social network that no one wants to admit: as the size of the network increases, our ability to be social decreases. Like anything else, networks and the information flowing through them follow the laws of supply and demand. As the number of bits, photos and links coming over these networks grew, each of those invisibly began to decrease in worth. Perhaps that explains the excitement over new products. When a smaller crew of people are using a tool, such as Foursquare, we can keep track of our friends’ locations and whereabouts. At a smaller scale, knowing this information and being able to expect that others have also seen it let us all in on a little secret, it made early use of Twitter feel somewhat magical. But as the number of friends begins to increase—particularly over that magic Dunbar number of 150—the spell begins to wear off. At this scale, we simply can’t easily keep track of it all. When our number of connections rises above 150 everything becomes simply comments, as real conversations tax our already limited ability to interface with the network. What used to be a small community of web explorers and renegades had turned into nothing more than a large party of somewhat meaningless Foursquare checkins and an excessive use of hashtags. That mythical thing, social connection, doesn’t flow over these networks; information flows over these networks. The only reason the network ever felt meaningful was because, at small scale, the network operated like a community. But that breaks apart at large scale. Which leads us to communities: Communities, the kind with clearly demarcated lines of membership, have always existed within the context of larger networks, and always broke off in bits and pieces to make them feel familiar. Communities, and the spaces that are given to them to form in, are the only way we are able to work with the network of the physical world. Our soccer team, our school, our workplace, our street, our town, all have their own communities. And I suspect that these are the only things that will make the digital world similarly manageable. Communities give us an audience and a perspective. We know who we’re talking to. This doesn’t seem like a big thing, but it’s the glue that holds our communication together. It’s the difference between shouting out into the void, and having a conversation with someone standing in front of you. What’s the difference between live tweeting a sports game or participating in an SB Nation game thread? A tweet is not an experience, it’s the broadcasting of an individuals’ experience to a vague and undefined audience. When I think about the kinds of things I tweet, they’re things like “I just read a cool article, check it out,” or “About to get on a plane,” or “GOALLLL!” if my team (the San Jose Sharks) has just scored. The thing about all these is that they’re not a shared experience—they are my experiences, which I am sharing with you, but you probably cannot experience with me—my thoughts or fascination with the article I just posted, the feeling of getting on that plane, or the thrill of watching the Sharks tie the game. Perhaps you can compare your notes of your own experience of these things; that’s what most Twitter conversation seems to be, to me, but the experiences are not shared. This differs from a discussion in a community, such as the type that occurs on SB Nation game day threads. The conversation does not center around any one individual’s experience, but rather the collective condition of the community. The conversation is the experience. Each comment is driven with the purpose of evoking and expressing the emotions that the community experiences, and particularly the ones they hold in common. This habit of evoking and expressing common emotions is what drives inside jokes and their internet incarnation, memes. Sure, there are disagreements and differences in communities, but the magic is in the similarities: Knowing that everyone on there is also a Sharks fan and just swore at the TV over that goal is emotional and valuable. That’s what expands the sense of belonging and membership that people in a  community feel, and becomes a basis for the entirety of the rest of the discussion (even, especially, differences). SB Nation is in real-time, but it doesn’t have to be: communities have sprung up for years on traditional, slow PHP bulletin boards. Lost fans populated message boards and blogs, uniting over their common love of Lost, and the way the show antagonized them—what is in that hatch?! If the pattern of all our networks is to grow larger, as Facebook has pushed others around it to become, consumers will hit these limits on the meaningfulness of these networks. If we are creating social products, we need to create products that do allow people to be social, really social. We need to build products that don’t just allow users to write and publish, we need to create products that encourage discussion, experiences, and lasting, meaningful relationships. These are the things that create real benefits for users and the products that inspire them. And thus, the future of the social web is no longer on a network, it’s within communities. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post was written by Dave Chase, the CEO of Avado.com, a patient relationship management company that was a TechCrunch Disrupt finalist. Previously he was a management consultant for Accenture’s healthcare practice consulting to 25 hospitals and was the founder of Microsoft’s Health business. You can follow him on Twitter @chasedave. Healthtech is an ever-growing sector, but from the $1 billion pool VCs poured into startups over the last year, health companies only received about 3 percent of that total. Not many healthtech startups have been able to secure those big venture rounds; however, last week, I highlighted one healthtech company that seems to be doing it right: Zocdoc, which raised a $50 million round from DST earlier this month, and offered a few takeaways for startups looking to learn from Zocdoc’s experience. (Check out the post here. As the aforementioned venture numbers from Rip’s post show, many startups really haven’t demonstrated the same wisdom Zocdoc has shown, which has led to an increasing number of healthtech failures over the last few years. One recent study in particular highlights this phenomena. After interviewing 110 digital health entrepreneurs, RockHealth recently released the findings of a study demonstrating the disconnect between the companies that are actually getting funding and the many that have come up empty. This disconnect sheds light onto why so many healthtech companies have failed to make an impact, or have had to undergo significant pivots in order to survive. Below you’ll find some of the top causes of healthtech startup failure: Lack of Specific Focus or Adoption point It’s well documented that a lack of focus kills startups whether they are in healthcare or not but it is particularly prevalent in healthcare. The healthcare industry suffers from an abundance of pain points and is in serious need of disruption, so it’s tempting for new startups to try to solve them all to make the greatest impact. However, these startups are ignoring the old saying about how to eat an elephant — one bite at a time. Too many startups are biting off more than they can chew. It’s best to pick one major pain point to address and go with it. Expected consumers to pay With the exception of weight loss programs, there aren’t many examples of consumers paying directly for health services. Over time, this is likely to change as more of the burden of healthcare costs gets shifted to consumers as was highlighted in Part II of the Healthcare Disruption series (see links below). However, I’d be very cautious about any business expecting to have consumers pay in the near-term. Expected consumer to enter lots of information While I believe there was a bigger reason why Google Health failed, expecting consumers to enter information is one of the big factors in why Personal Health Records (PHR) have failed to gain meaningful traction. Most PHRs rely on the individual entering information and few are willing to do that. Required huge amounts of money This tended to happen in bubble periods where there was a grand vision and frothy funding markets threw huge sums of money. Ultimately, they weren’t sustainable franchises. Require multiple and intricate partnerships A startup dependent on too many partnerships is likely to run into issues as those partnerships frequently involve established players. Unfortunately, the established players have a dramatically different sense of urgency. Many good ideas have died on the vine waiting for business development and legal departments at established players who didn’t share the startup’s sense of urgency. Lacked Understanding of Reimbursement Dynamics This is by far the number one reason why healthtech startups have failed. The findings from RockHealth’s study highlight an important dimension of this. On a positive note, 77 percent of VCs think healthcare IT investment dollars will increase in 2011. Already 35 digital health companies having received $2M+ in 2011. The important point is that 80% of those receiving funding are B2B (i.e., selling to either healthcare providers, businesses, etc.) yet the majority of digital health entrepreneurs surveyed think consumers will pay for their product or service. Despite this fact, most early stage digital health entrepreneurs are building B2C companies. Before it’s too late, hopefully these companies will find a way for someone other than consumers to pay. This could be via an advertising model or by licensing the technology to organizations. In this case, the consumer is the product, not the customer. The customer is the organization. You can find RockHealth’s full study embedded below for your viewing pleasure: The following is the Healthcare Disruption series referenced above: Healthcare Disruption: Pharma 3.0 Will Drive Shift from Life Science to HealthTech InvestingHealthcare Disruption: Providers Will Use HealthTech to Differentiate and Produce Better Outcomes (Part II)Healthcare Disruption: Providers Are Making Newspaper Industry Mistakes (Part III) Image excerpt courtesy of Wikipedia Commons Latest headlines delivered to you daily Bizness Apps, the startup that gives small businesses the tools to quickly and easily build mobile apps, launched in October 2010 and has been growing like gangbusters, reaching over 1,000 applications, 10 languages, and over 20 countries in less than 9 months. It also recently partnered with WuFoo to give SMBS the ability to create and seamlessly add contact forms, online surveys, and invitations to their apps. The startup also has an interesting founding story that provides some useful lessons for your entrepreneurs. Check out our April coverage here.  Bizness Apps’s value proposition is simple: The startup wants to make mobile apps affordable, customizable, and simple to make for the small business owner. Thus, the startup offers a DIY iPhone, iPad, and Android app platform that enables SMBs to create, edit, and manage mobile apps without any programming experience required. You start with a template, customize them to suit your business, and then Bizness Apps makes them native apps and distributes them on iTunes and the Android Marketplace. The startup is not without competitors in this space, as iSites, SwebApps and Mobile Roadie are targeting a similar endpoint. But Bizness Apps has a real advantage in the fact that it’s product is easy to use, designed well, yet remains affordable. The price for using either their iOS or Android platform is $39, while those that want to create both Android and iOS apps pay $59. This affordability is very appealing to small businesses looking to take advantage of mobile business without having to fork over thousands of dollars to do so. Native apps are great and all, you might say, but what about this supposed HTML5 revolution? Where my web apps at? Nothwithstanding the fact that there’s been a hot debate over whether app developers should go for HTML5 or native apps (as evidenced by MG’s post on the subject back in February), Bizness Apps Founder and CEO Andrew Gazdecki said that he thinks the best approach is to make a bet on mobile as a whole — not one or the other. That’s why the startup is today announcing the launch of an HTML5 version of their DIY mobile app platform for small businesses. With this new web functionality, users of the service are now able to create nearly identical mobile experiences for every mobile platform including iOS, Android, Blackberry, Windows Mobile, and so on — they can go native or HTML5, or both. For an extra $10 a month.  As part of the HTML5 platform launch, Bizness Apps has built a QR code-enabled mobile marketing template to provide SMBs with a simple and affordable way to market their mobile apps to their customers. The template image, as seen above, is automatically created (with the ability to print) with one click from inside the HTML5 platform. The idea here, Gazdecki says, is to help direct a business’ customers to the appropriate app based on what type of mobile device they’re using. For example, if a user has an Android phone, they would scan the Android themed QR code to be directed to the business’ Android app. Availability on native and HTML5 is another important piece to the puzzle in building a platform agnostic app development tool for SMBs, and with its affordability, and new mobile marketing capabilities, Bizness Apps has become an exciting platform and looks well-positioned to weather the native vs. web apps debate. The startup is offering a coupon code for 25 free apps for TC readers, which you can check out by signing up here. The coupon code is “techcrunch”. For more, check out the video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve known that mobile ad network Millennial Media more than tripled revenue in 2010 from 2009 and achieved profitability. But we didn’t know how much the mobile ad network brought in, until now. In the recent 2011 Inc 500 list, Millennial revealed that it saw $47.8 million in 2010 revenue, up over 3,000 percent from 2007 revenue of $1.5 million. And while we don’t know what Millennial’s net income is, we know the company is profitable. Millennial is one of the largest remaining independent ad networks after AdMob was bought by Google and Apple acquired Quattro. There’s no doubt that many technology companies have eyed Millennial as an acquisition target, but the company has managed to remain independent despite the increased consolidation taking place in the mobile ad space. In addition to Millennial’s independent ad network, the company also operates and manages private mobile ad networks for large media companies and conglomerates that have multiple apps and sites, essentially powering a self-service ad network for these companies. And Millennial has a deal with a “prominent internet media company” (but declines to name the company) that has completely outsourced its mobile advertising to Millennial. For basis of comparison, AdMob reportedly had a $100 million revenue run rate when it was acquired in 2009, which could have put its actual revenue at $40 million (AdMob split its revenues 60/40 with publishers). It’s unclear if Millennial’s $47.8 million in 2010 revenue is post-split. Hopefully we’ll see more details of Millennial’s financials when the company files its S-1 for a public offering in the coming months. CEO and founder Paul Palmieri has had ambitions of taking the company public, and the timing may be right considering this seems to be the year of the tech company IPO. In May, Bloomberg reported that Millennial was talking to bankers about an IPO, which could come in the Fall or in early 2012 and would value the company at a whopping $700 million to $1 billion (AdMob was sold to Google for $750 million). Considering how most companies refuse to reveal exact financials when they are private, it’s always interesting to see revenue numbers pre-IPO. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMike Lazerow on Buddy Media’s BusinessMike Lazerow is a serial entrepreneur who is the CEO of Buddy Media and previously founded GOLF.com, which was bought by Time Warner and University Wire and is now a property of CBS. With a couple of successful startups under his belt, we decided to bring Lazerow into the studio for an episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon. Right off the bat the two discussed Lazerow’s latest venture, Buddy Media, which just raised $54 million. Buddy Media helps brands cohesively manage their social media presence and marketing campaigns on sites like Facebook, Twitter and YouTube. Once consumers are connected to the social media sites “it is all about giving them relevant content and that is what our platform does” explains Lazerow who describes how Starwood Hotels and Resorts uses the service. Every brand, he says, is now expected to have a Facebook page to connect with consumers, but once they do connect then they become publishers of sorts, pushing what they hope is relevant content to those consumers. Continuing the conversation in the video below, Lazerow talks about the strategy behind building the company and offers some numbers. He tells Dixon, “It all starts with the product. Whatever you do if you are not the best on the product side the business doesn’t work, there is a reason we have 9 out of the top 10 global marketers using our platform.” However, Lazerow notes having a great product is just one part of the equation. You have to build a great business. He credits his wife and co-founder with scaling the business. He says “it is not just about a great product it’s about how you sell it and how you support it and so we invested in that early and what has happened is our early success with clients kind of spread … and we became the go-to player.” The strategy paid off. Lazerow notes that Buddy Media has raised a total of $90 million, of which $70 million is still in the bank. The company is generating “millions of dollars a month” in revenues, which are doubling every 6 months, and the company has jumped from 40 employees a year ago to 200 today. He goes on to tell Dixon “once you find a business model, that is the time to scale.” It took 20 months to get to the first $1 million of monthly recurring revenues, the second million dollars took only 5 months, and now the business is adding another million dollars in monthly recurring revenues every 3 months. Check out the video for additional insights and make sure to watch past episodes of Founder Stories, located here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily About a month ago, Tom Anderson (or Myspace Tom, if you prefer) wrote a post on his new favorite social network, Google+, offering a few bits of advice for Twitter. While many of us enjoy a good Twittering now and again, Anderson pointed out that there are a few simple features Twitter might consider if it wants to boost the overall quality of its user experience. The main thrust being that the social experience of Twitter might be improved were the company to add a “discussion” or chat function that would, in Tom’s conception, give the viewer an input box by which to leave a comment and easily discuss tweets without flooding followers’ streams with one part of an on-going conversation. Well, Tom might just be interested in a new startup launching today, called Joint. Ok, well it’s not an exact replica of the Myspace founder’s idea, but it’s attacking the same pain point long discussed by Twitter users: In that the platform is badly in need of a better way to facilitate realtime, private, and longer-form conversations. Of course, there’s some disagreement among users over whether or not Twitter should be the one offering this feature, or whether it should stay simple, just as it is. Joint Founder Ethan Gahng says (and I tend to agree) that Twitter will be best served by staying simple in terms of its UI, and instead allowing third party startups and developers to be the ones to add further social and chat features from the outside. (And Twitter’s actions over the last few years seem to largely be in line with this philosophy.) To work towards this goal, Joint essentially turns any Twitter hashtag into an IRC (Internet Relay Channel)-like chat room, which is integrated with a realtime hashtag stream from Twitter. Check it out below. This combo allows users to participate in a number of different social interactions, including a front-and-center realtime group chat feature, which populates with a live hashtag feed in the right sidebar.  Users can then pull the hashtags directly into the group chat, or invite the people who wrote the tweets into the group chat, right from the chat room, or simply hang out and enjoy synchronous chat, watching as the tweet stream populates. Compared to Hootsuite, Tweetdeck and other third party apps that let you track hashtags, being able to watch someone tweet from “outside” and bring them in and chat immediately is a subtle boundary and distinction proffered by Joint that really makes a big difference.  If you’re trying to engage in a conversation with someone on Twitter that goes beyond a few “@ replies”, you’re either forced to DM or take the conversation elsewhere. Joint allows users to easily join a group chat, as well as discuss notable or popular hashtags. For instance, of late “#irene” has become a much-used hashtag, as Hurricane Irene is poised to hit the East Coast. Joint could become a very useful resource for people looking to easily congregate and discuss ongoing situations like hurricanes, protests, or events, live, from any location.  Another cool aspect of Joint’s platform is that it’s meant to function as an off-the-record conversation medium for Twitter users, meaning that if I’m having a conversation with someone and a third person joins the chat room, they won’t be able to see the ongoing conversation. This, Gahng says, is intended to make Joint group chat more reflective of interaction in the real world.  As to Joint’s intended use cases, Gahng says that it’s easy to connect to other people on Twitter, but it’s hard to actually get to know them, so using Joint, you can meet someone on Twitter that you want to play Starcraft with — many of your followers may not want to join in on the fun. Which is why open standards warrior Chris Messina proposed the hashtag in the first place, but of course, not many people regularly follow hashtags in their day-to-day Twitter usage. Joint looks to change this by making it easy to search for different hashtags, discuss, and follow them synchronously in realtime. For an example, check out the Starcraft channel here. Not to mention the fact that, because tweeting with hashtags means that your tweets get archived and live forever on search engines, etc., many people feel uncomfortable about having public conversations (about more private issues, especially) on Twitter. We’ve all had to delete a tweet or two, and often too late. By giving Twitter users that added benefit of social flexibility, Joint hopes to give itself a leg up on other third party Twitter apps.  Lastly, beyond simply being able to follow a hashtag group, Joint also informs a user when there’s a new user in their chat room, offers search descriptions, and gives users the ability to browse the main directory, or even start their own hashtag channel.   Joint solves a major pain point experienced often by Twitter users, and from my experience in the chat rooms and poking around on the site, the UI is straightforward, and chat is fast and easy to use. The three-person Joint team has been working on this since January, and the startup is bootstrapped at this point, but if the platform can scale and continue to function in realtime without glitches, this seems like something that can definitely have legs.  Joint and its team isn’t affiliated with Twitter in any way, but I wouldn’t be surprised if the social network comes knocking at their door at some point down the road. For more, check out Joint at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yandex, one of the leading Internet companies in Russia, has acquired startup venture The Tweeted Times, which enables people to create custom online ‘newspapers’ generated from their Twitter accounts. Financial terms of the purchase were not disclosed, but Yandex says it aims to continue offering the social news service and that the entire The Tweeted Times team will be joining the search engine company. The Tweeted Times was co-founded by Maxim Grinev and Maria Grineva, both computer scientists at ETH Zurich, Switzerland, and others. Its users include celebrities like Snoop Dogg, Alyssa Milano and Lance Weiler. Yandex, which went public last May and is currently valued at just shy of $10 billion, plans to use technologies acquired from The Tweeted Times to boost its search and content services with information from social networks. This is the third company Yandex has acquired in the past nine months – its most recent purchases include single sign-in plugin maker Loginza and WebVisor’s behavior analysis technology and team. The Tweeted Times, formerly called Twitter Times, competes with social news curation service Paper.li, which has itself raised over $2 million in financing. Another company operating in this space is Summify.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Turntable.fm is so hot right now. In fact, when it comes to tweets, the synchronous social music platform may even have more Klout than Pandora or Spotify. With the rise in popularity of Turntable, it’s only natural that video curation platforms would be eager to take a cue from the music dance party site and bring that disco to videos. Two weeks ago, we covered the launch of Chill, which in concept is almost a direct analogue of Turntable.fm for videos, except that in the case of Chill, there are “Lounges” as opposed to the DJ rooms of Turntable. A stretch, I know. Of course, when it comes to social video experiences, there’s Socialcam and Google+, which both let you watch videos with your friends online, but there’s so much more potential here for interactivity, as shown by Turntable. ShortForm, the year-and-half-old startup that launched to help video fanatics create personalized channels of web video content, also recently took to the synchronous, social video experience, as it recently launched its Live Video Parties integration, which allows video jockeys to broadcast video content to a live audience. When we first covered ShortForm back in March, the startup had just crossed the million visitors milestone, and the adoption continues, as ShortForm CEO Nader Ghaffari told me that, in July alone, the startup attracted 1 million unique visitors. This is a key leg up for ShortForm as it enters a hot space, as its new video party feature was built on top of thousands of already-curated video channels, from sources like YouTube, Vimeo, and pretty much every other video platform out there.  As ShortForm has already launched to make it easy for their VJs to mix videos from these platforms into their own personalized channels, broadcast in back-to-back format like the TV viewing experience. Thus, ShortForm’s VJs can play their own curated video channels for their audience or pick from thousands of other VJ channels from the startup’s channel guide.  Of course, up until now, the startup’s VJs were viewing video content asynchronously, but with the launch of Video Parties, ShortFormers can now view curated video content simultaneously with hundreds of other friends, and chat with these other viewers while they watch — just like Turntable.  The neat thing about ShortForm’s approach is that it spotlights profile pictures of all the viewers in a live video party to bring in that extra level of social interactivity between viewers and VJs. Of course, when it comes to what videos are played, the host VJ controls the party and what’s shown. However, the host can, at any point, pass the “remote”, so to speak, to any other viewer, turning that viewer into the new VJ. If the original host doesn’t like what they’re seeing, they can always snatch the remote back from the offending VJ and restore their control over what cat videos are being played. “The big vision I see here”, Ghaffari said, “is that the first wave of stars in online video were the content creators. Now, with so much content produced daily, there is an opportunity to create a new breed of stars. Those stars are VJs who can curate that content into channels that tell amazing stories and share those channels with friends and viewers worldwide. Live Video Parties give those VJs a social and interactive way to tell their stories”. Live Video Parties really do have the opportunity to be addictive and engaging experiences, especially through chat, as viewers can discuss in realtime what they’re watching, or take off and start their own party. The fact that users can pass the baton around, too, and give the VJing power to other users, goes a long way to building a true interactive video platform. To give TC readers a taste of the Video Party experience, ShortForm has created a custom party focused on a TechCrunch-branded experience, in this case specifically Chris Dixon’s “Founder Stories”. Viewers can join each other, as well as the ShortForm staff, to watch a simultaneous stream of Dixon’s interviews. Of course, usually the host can pass the remote to other viewers, but in this case, it’s all Founder Stories, all the time. It’s a great example of how VJs, brands, and more will be able to customize their pages and their video experience to grab eyes, views, and maybe even dollars. Check out the Founder Stories party here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily DoughMain, a startup that combines family coordination and financial education into a simple, realtime, and gamified platform, has announced that it has raised $5 million in seed funding from a series of private angel investors. The round of financing has been used to support the launch and rollout of DoughMain.com, as well as to contribute to the development of DoughMain’s mobile applications. But what exactly is DoughMain all about? DoughMain President and CEO Kenneth Damato said that the startup’s goal is simple: It wants to give families across the country a simple solution that allows them to coordinate household activities and, in doing so, expose their children to important financial management skills.  DoughMain is attacking household management by offering its users services like an integrated family calendar, a chore tracker, and an allowance (or rewards) tool — as well as three initial age-relevant gaming sites to make American households run like clockwork and give kids a fun and useful tool to help them learn (in an age-appropriate way) how to save, use, and manage money.  The startup’s so-called “family coordination platform” allows parents to customize the DoughMain platform in such a way that it acts as a secure, personalized micro-network for their family. Within that network, family members can view each of their own responsibilities, what chores still need to be accomplished, for example, as well as that of the entire family. (Presumably so that they can bug their younger siblings until they complete their chores and learn how to balance their checkbooks.) Parents can control the amount of information their children can access, be it the ability to create calendar entries or to show that a specific chore has been completed. Because the platform updates in realtime, parents can reward their obedient children for their accomplishments with “DoughPoints”, the startup’s virtual currency, or through boosting their allowances, via hard, American currency. designate that a chore has been completed. Since information is updated in real-time, parents can  On top of its family coordination platform, the startup offers financial education options that are neatly integrated with chores and the other financial experiences their children move through as part of interacting with the platform. The platform offers teacher-developed content through safe gaming platforms like TheFunVault.com, a Flash game that teaches basic money management lessons for kids ages 5 to 9, or through SandDollarCity.com, a multiplayer virtual world where kids ages 8 to 12 manage a family candy stop, or, finally, IRuleMoney.com, a site that features financial content and contests for teenagers. The mobile version of DoughMain is scheduled to be released in September, which will allow families to stay connected and coordinate on-the-go. For more, check out DoughMain at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Where do you get your news (besides TechCrunch, of course)? Some of you may like that familiar tactile experience of newsprint, ink on the fingers, but chances are that your news consumption takes place mostly online — or on a mobile device. But thanks to the content fire hose that is the Internet, there’s a lot of irrelevant junk floating around out there, and, thus, the focus of digital readers and content distributors has turned to improving the filters, aggregators, and readers that channel the noise into signal. Whether your go-to resources for realtime news happen to be Twitter, Facebook, RSS feeds, or the TechMemes of the world, we’re all looking for an easy, curated, and social, way to consume content from the sites we trust — as well as those we like but don’t visit as often. XYDO, a startup that launched in May and raised $1.25 from EPIC Ventures and a host of angels in June, has hopped into the social news space by offering a user experience that combines the best parts of sites like Digg and Hacker News in an effort to serve you with relevant, curated, and social news from top content houses. XYDO has met with early success (over 750,000 unique visitors in August alone) because of that very idea: It wants to be a newsfeed that effectively prioritizes the content that actually matters to you. For starters, it does this via its web platform. But what if we don’t want to click over to XYDO.com every time we want to get the latest headlines?  To expand on its news personalization mission and to try to hit users with a virtual version of a rolled up newspaper right at home, the startup is today announcing the launch of XYDO Brief, which aims to deliver personalized and relevant news based on a user’s social interactions, networks, and footprints — all via email, the place they’re likely to be at least once a day. News via email? Well that’s nothing new, you might say. And you wouldn’t be wrong. But XYDO is hoping to offer a value proposition and an occasion to rethink this stance by combing the Web and your social networks to provide a really simple, realtime method to get news via the inbox. XYDO Brief takes advantage of the same social sourcing mixed with actual human curation technique that it is used by its flagship product.  Every piece of content that enters its system (from over 100,000 content sources) is scored based on the recommendations of the startup’s 2 million+ contributors and curators. Using its secret sauce of social network aggregation and prioritization mixed with crowdsourced curation, XYDO serves its users with between 10 to 12 personalized headlines in every email — that have passed these socially-tested benchmarks to ensure the news you’re receiving in your inbox is the news you want to see. The default setting on XYDO Brief is one email a day, but users can go in and select different categories of blasts (be it “tech” or “politics”) that they’d like to receive, as well as how many of these briefs they’d like to receive — and at what time of day. For those who live on wire services, this seems very similar; it’s the broadly available email version. So, for those of us who spend all day in our inboxes anyway, being able to tinker with a simple service that’s fairly customizable, in an effort to provide an easy way to read the news without having to go search our social networks and favorite content sources — is huge. Also of note: XYDO is providing TechCrunch readers with 500 exclusive (and free) invites to check out their new product. To test the service for yourself, click here. Then come on back and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some of the most interesting and relevant content on Quora are related to places. But up until now, Quora hasn’t done much to focus that data using location. Today, they’re starting to. A new feature going live shortly will allow users to set location information for topics. For example, if there’s a topic about the Golden Gate Bridge in San Francisco, you can now drop a pin to indicate where that is on a map. This location will then show up to everyone browsing that topic. And the map can be set to show the satellite or terrain view as well (they’re using Google Maps). Specific addresses can also be entered. This may not sound like a big deal, but it likely points to where Quora is thinking about heading with regard to location itself. The company notes that as more people use the service from their mobile phones, location-based questions and answers are increasingly important. This is something that other startups, like Hipster, have been built around. Location also more generally allows Quora to tie topics together in a new way. For example, if you’re planning a trip somewhere, you could look up interesting information around the area you’re headed that might not otherwise be surfaced by a general query. It looks like Facebook aren’t the only ones taking location more seriously. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re a fan of cloud-based music lockers, it’s a good time to be alive. Back in March, Amazon somewhat surprisingly beat Apple and Google to the music streaming and storage punch with their “Cloud Drive” and “Cloud Player”. Both Google and Apple have since launched cloud music offerings (or betas thereof), and all three continue to improve and evolve as time marches on.  As a music fan, it’s great to see cloud music storage and streaming services moving forward in tandem, even if we all have to admit to having our own personal favorite. Because, frankly, the more competition in this space, the better. Which is why you should be paying attention to a new startup that’s entering stage left: Mecanto. Yes, today, a new cloudy music service enters the arena, promising unlimited music streaming and storage to listeners all over the world — that won’t put a dent in your wallet. (Mecanto is offering TC readers 1,000 free 6-month subscriptions. Huzzah! See below for more info.) Tel Aviv-based Mecanto is hitting the scene this week with a cloud-enabled music-player and storage service that is easy to set up and features all the things a user wants from their trusty neighborhood music locker: Unlimited storage and streaming, the ability to automatically sync your iTunes library and PC folders with your online account (from multiple PCs), global availability, playlist editing, video, easy browsing, and cross-platform functionality. Also doesn’t hurt that users can find Mecanto on the Web, or go mobile on iOS, Android, Windows Phone, and Symbian. The MeCanto mobile interface is pretty nifty and offers users the ability to easily listen to songs and albums, or create playlists. Songs stream over 3G or WiFi, and users can listen to any song they want without having to worry about how much space the song takes up on their phone. Here’s to you, cloud. It’s sounds like a great start, right? Sure, but with names like Amazon, Google, Apple, Spotify and umpteen others staring them down, Mecanto definitely has an uphill climb ahead. That being said, right now affordability is a strong selling point for the Israeli music service. Take a look at its competitors: Spotify Unlimited and Premium cost $60 a year and $120 a year, respectively, iCloud comes in at about $25 a year, Amazon’s Cloud Drive and Cloud Player cost at least $20 a year (and unlimited storage may be a limited-time offering).  Google, on the other hand is currently free, but there’s little likelihood that it will stay that way for long. In comparison, at $20 a year, Mecanto is an appealing alternative to the big players, especially as it offers worldwide availability, cross-platform integration, and instant uploads — a suite which its competitors only offer in pieces.  Furthermore, first time Mecanto users get a free month-long trial of the service, at the end of which they can pay $20 for the whole year or split it up at a $2 monthly rate. To begin using, users only have to download a small application to their desktops, which will then upload and sync all of your music automatically. Bada bing, bada boom. The best part: Mecanto’s upload process is accelerated, which means that users can access their music almost instantly, even before the upload is finished. Listeners can access their music right away, or they can choose to upload their files at a slower pace, saving bandwidth without having to worry about delays.  Not wanting to be antisocial in the Age of Facebook, the music service also offers social features, including the ability to add YouTube videos to one’s account and playlists as well as the ability to share those YouTube clips on Facebook and Twitter, Last.fm scrobbling of tracks, sharing current tracks to social networks, multi-desktop sync, and smart categorization of tracks. As to file support? Mecanto works with MP3, M4A, WMA, OGG, FLAC, and most of their derivations.  Mecanto’s so-called “three screens and a cloud” platform really is a great alternative to the big names in the space, and a “Dropbox for music” isn’t an unfair analogy. Sure, it’s design isn’t quite up to par with some of the others, but its affordability, worldwide availability, and cross-platform functionality may just give Mecanto the legs it needs to be taken seriously in a space crowded with familiar names. So far, the startup has raised $2 million in funding from private angels, but you can be sure the startup will be seeking more cash as it begins to scale and rolls out worldwide. The Israeli music locker is definitely worth a look, especially under the auspices of a free month-long trial and the fact that the first 1,000 TechCrunch readers that click here will receive free six-month-long trials of the service. I mean, who doesn’t like a music deal? Check it out.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last night I went out to dinner. But I didn’t pick where I was going, Ness did. The place was good. Score one for Ness. We previously covered Ness Computing in July, talking about the technology that would power their eventual apps (as well as their funding). Today, the first such app has gone live in the App Store, called simply, Ness. It’s a personal search engine catering to restaurants. And it’s good. Whereas most food and restaurant recommendation apps focus on ratings from the general population, Ness is tailored around social as well as your own tastes. Others have tried this before as well, but Ness seems to have it nailed thanks to a ton of data they’ve already been pulling in before the app even launched. They can do this because they hook into Facebook, Foursquare, and Twitter (as well as a few other, smaller sources) to find signals about certain restaurants. Are people tweeting about liking them? Are users checking in there a lot? Those kind of things. This helps to determine what restaurants Ness should show to you within the app. When you first load up the app, you’re asked to rate ten places you’ve been. This helps calibrate your “Likeness” score, the key to the recommendations. These Likeness scores show up as a percentage likelihood that you’ll like the restaurant being shown. This alongside proximity and the social data determine what restaurants are shown to you. But the app is also more of a search engine in the more traditional sense as well. You can easily search for different types of food, whether they’re broad or specific. And you can choose to search in other cities. Or you can alter the search settings to restrict a search by price and weed out bigger chains, for example. When you find a place you like, you can drill deeper to get hours of operation, phone numbers, a website, etc. You can also save places to come back to later. And you can share restaurants with friends with the click of a button. They key to the app though is the ease of use and the accuracy of the data. I was constantly finding the Likeness ratings were roughly correct for what my actual rating would be for restaurants I’ve been to. And the system will only get better as you rate more venues. The look and feel of the app is also beautiful. I’m told that we can thank an original iPhone team member formerly of Apple and now with Ness, for that. Remember that restaurant recommendations are just step one of what Ness hopes to offer. The next steps are to point the Likeness engine towards shopping, music, nightlife, and entertainment. All of that could make for one killer, subjective mobile search engine. You can find Ness in the App Store here. Sadly, it’s U.S.-only for now.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yipit, the site that aggregates and recommends daily deals based on users’ locations and interests (and raised $6 million back in June from a host of VCs), released some interesting trend data today on the daily deals space. Overall, July was not a memorable month for the daily deals industry, though there were a few clear winners, including everyone’s favorite deals site, the big kahuna, Groupon.  Based on data collected from over 650 daily deals services, Yipit found that the industry’s total revenue declined in July by 7 percent in North America’s largest markets — in spite of a slight increase in the number of total offers. The data also shows that the number of daily deals sites declined slightly in July, with 38 deals sites closing their doors compared to 36 new sites being launched.  As for the big players, according to the report, Groupon’s revenue declined 4 percent from June, while, in contrast, LivingSocial’s revenue declined by a sizable 18 percent. Though Groupon widened the gap with its rival in July, the revenue of both companies declined by over 20% in the first half of July, compared to the first half of June. However, though Groupon’s revenue in the second half July actually increased over the second half of June, LivingSocial’s declined. Also of note: Groupon generated more than twice as much gross revenue than LivingSocial. Not a good month for Groupon’s competitor.  As one might guess from the preceding data, Groupon nabbed a bit of market share at the expense of its competitor, reversing a trend that had persisted over the last few months. Thus, Groupon continues to retain its iron grip on total market share, representing nearly 50 percent of the total daily deal market, more than twice the size of LivingSocial at 21 percent, and far more than the next contender on the list, Travelzoo, which currently represent a mere 5 percent of the market.  Groupon also owned the highest grossing deal in July, the report said, as its Photoboom America deal generating $575,505 of revenue in the top 30 North American markets. Groupon and LivingSocial dominated the top ten grossing deals in the space, with six of the top ten, compared to four for LivingSocial.  Some other interesting data points include the fact that, despite its relatively small chunk of market share compared to the top dogs, Travelzoo continued to aggressively expand its “local deals” offering, increasing the number of deals offered in the top 30 North American markets by 48 percent, recording a revenue increase of over 35 percent. And it seems that, just as Google must be mentioned in seemingly every other industry trend report out there, the search giant is now finding its way into daily deals statistics as well, as Google Offers “continue to have significantly lower prices and revenue per deal than Groupon or LivingSocial deals”, according to the report. That being said, while Google Offers’ average number of vouchers was only slightly less than that of Groupon and LivingSocial, revenue per deal was significantly lower.  Google Offers launched in Portland, but has expanded to New York and San Francisco. Of course, while Google hopes to begin making waves in its new cities, especially considering that the report found that Google Offers struggled in Portland in July, generating less that 10 percent of the revenue that Groupon made in Portland in July.  But perhaps the biggest winner in the daily space were “travel deals” sites, which continued to expand in July, accounting for six of the top 10 deals in July — and became the third-largest daily deal category, with travel deals accounting for six of the top 10 deals and nearly 15 percent of the industry’s revenue.  Excerpt image courtesy of Dagger Tools. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nextpeer is a newly launched mobile developer toolkit that lets game developers quickly and easily add multi-player gaming to their single-player games. With Nextpeer’s tournament and social SDK (software development kit), developers can add customizable features that enable their game’s users join real-time, social tournaments where they compete against other users for top scores or achievements. The idea is so simple, it’s surprising it hasn’t been done before. People like mobile games and they like playing games together, but until now, the only way developers can build a multi-player gaming experience is by building a multi-player game from scratch. With Nextpeer, however, any game can become a multi-player game. How It Works For users, Nextpeer is easy to use, too. Gamers launch the app, tap the “online tournaments/multi-player” button and sign in using Facebook Connect. This takes them to a screen displaying which live tournaments are available to join – an experience similar to joining a table on Zynga’s Texas HoldEm, for example.  The player then places a bet to join the tournament. (This part is optional, and will depend on the game).  When the tournament starts, the gamers aren’t playing alongside each other in the sense that all their characters are on the screen together. Instead, the user plays the game as usual, but receives real-time notifications regarding their status, e.g. “You’re in 3rd place! Hurry up!” or “Daniel is about to win!” Depending on the game, the goal may be to be the first to reach a certain number of points, earn an achievement, complete a task, etc.  When the session time completes, the players re-join the table, the winner is announced, and if a wager was involved, the winner takes all the other players’ virtual money, in the form of Nextpeer currency. A Standalone App for Finding Nextpeer Games is Next Nextpeer currency will be available for purchase in the accompanying Nextpeer mobile application (not out yet), which will also feature the games that use the Nextpeer technology. Company Co-founder and CEO Shai Magzimof admits that the details for how the revenue share will work haven’t been worked out yet, but it could be something like 90/10 (developer/Nextpeer). But revenue share isn’t the main reason why developers would use Nextpeer technology, Magzimof says. More importantly, Nextpeer will allow developers another avenue for distribution and opportunities for marketing, both within the Nextpeer standalone app and its website. Access to more players, especially more engaged, regular players, means an increased opportunity for generating revenue through the game’s own monetization mechanisms, whether that’s a virtual economy, advertising or paid downloads. And Nextpeer promises to stay out of whatever that in-game revenue stream may be. Join the Beta! The Nextpeer SDK is initially available for iOS only (Android will come later), and the company already has a few games in testing. It’s also in talks with other developers, both big and small/indie. (And by “big” we mean really, really, really big.) Interested developers can sign up now to join the private beta here. The Nextpeer app will go live in a couple of weeks. Magzimof previously participated in the Y-Combinator program on the startup that later became Greplin. Co-founder and CTO Daniel Shir was formerly a developer at Fring and Co-founder and VP Itamar Mula also co-founded mobile game studio Social Expeditions. Nextpeer is the pivot from Android app Innobell, which made phone calls social. The company has raised $300,000 from angel investor Morris Wolfson. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Diffbot is a geeky and incredibly interesting technology that uses bots, algorithms, computer vision and artificial intelligence to process the content on the Web the way a human being can. “The entire Internet can be broken down into 30 different page types” explains Co-founder Mike Tung, also known as “Diffbot Mike,” and “Diffbot can identify them all.” Diffbot knows the difference between a social network profile, a blog post, a site’s front page, a product page, an event page and dozens more. Today, Diffbot is releasing its first set of APIs, now open to all developers for free. The launch has the potential to dramatically impact the types of applications developers can build, and for consumers, it means a whole host of intelligent applications are about to emerge. The New APIs: On-Demand & Follow With the two API’s available now, developers can build apps that automatically extract meaning from pages, apps that understand what’s trending and who’s talking about it, apps that provide RSS feeds where none were available before and apps that read just the relevant parts of webpages aloud, ignoring ads, header and footer copy. And that’s just for starters. Future API’s will enable developers to automatically turn event pages into calendar appointments, social network profiles into vCards or automatically extract shipping prices or reviews from product pages, among other things. While Diffbot doesn’t have a set roadmap, it expects to launch these additional API’s over the new few months. Today, the first 2 API’s available are: What Can Diffbot Actually Do?  These same APIs are already being used by companies like speech recognition system maker Nuance, AOL (disclaimer: TechCrunch is owned by AOL), social media monitoring firm SocMetrics, and others.  AOL uses Diffbot to extract the title, author, image, text, videos, topics and other metadata for its new iPad mag, AOL Editions. Nuance uses the technology to improve its natural language processing in a product for doctors, which requires comprehension of complex medical terminology. SocMetrics sends bit.ly shortened links to Diffbot to get the full article text and topics, so it can determine which social media users are talking about which topics the most.  These are just a few big-name examples. There are smaller, but just as innovative use cases out there, too. Like Hacker News Radio, for example, which reads Hacker News and comments to you. Or FeedBeater, which makes it easy to turn any URL into an RSS feed automatically (one of Diffbot’s first creations). Or this Diffbot-generated Twitter feed, which tracks changes to the webpage for the city of São Paulo, Brazil (as it lacks RSS), and tweets the updates. The new self-serve platform for developers is free up to 50,000 API calls per month. The cloud plan provides 100,000 calls for $500, then is $0.002/call afterwards. The Managed plan for Enterprise requires custom pricing. Diffbot was founded by Mike Tung and Leith Abdulla, both Stanford PhD students on a leave of absence to build the company. The idea sprung from Tung’s desire to automatically track new assignments on the class website automatically, through the use of technology. Diffbot was also the first startup funded by Stanford’s incubator program, now called StartX (formerly SSE Labs). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Jumio, the new technology that turns webcams into credit card readers, is now offering a plugin for WordPress websites. The new Jumio Netswipe add-on allows website visitors to pay for products or make donations quickly and easily, just by holding up their credit card to their computer’s webcam. For WordPress publishers, adding Netswipe to their site is simple – just download, install and activate like any other WordPress plugin. With the new plugin, WordPress site owners get a “Netswipe PayMe” button which can be placed anywhere on their website. All the payments are managed through your Jumio account, which is free of charge after registration. After downloading the WordPress Plugin here, just unzip it and upload the folder ‘Wordpress_Jumio_Payment_Plugin’ to the ‘/wp-content/plugins/’ directory. Then activate the plugin through the “Plugins” menu in WordPress. You can then configure your options in WordPress’s “Settings” menu. (More detailed instructions are here).  Jumio launched last month, introducing its seamless, one-stop solution for merchants and developers with the intention of disrupting the payments industry. Not only is the technology easy to use, it also adds a layer of security to digital transactions since the physical card has to be present in order for Jumio’s webcam solution to work. Initially, the technology is only available for desktop websites, but, later this year, a two-part mobile solution will become available. This part of the Jumio’s system will include a mobile app and developer library. Jumio’s mobile developer tools are the aspect of the solution that’s most like Card.io, which offers a similar toolkit. Jumio received $6.5 million in funding from Facebook co-founder Eduardo Saverin and other investors back in March. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this month, Monetate, the platform that provides marketers with testing and targeting services for their websites, announced that it had closed a $15 million series B funding round, led by OpenView Venture Partners, which added to the $5.1 million series A round the company raised back in December from First Round Capital and FLOODGATE. With over $20 million in the bank, Monetate has been developing a new platform that gives marketers greater control over messaging and promotions on their websites as well as testing, targeting, and personalization tools. As we reported a few weeks ago, the coolest part about Monetate’s platform is that it can be installed using a single line of code. The startup’s newest version of its cloud-based platform enables marketers to integrate customized content and features between the eCommerce server and the site visitor’s browser.  “One of the unfulfilled promises from the early days of eCommerce was that marketers would be able to deliver the right message to the right customer at the right time”, says Monetate CEO David Brussin. “With Monetate, we have inserted a new level of agility into the eCommerce marketing experience, providing marketers with the ability to make educated campaign decisions that will directly contribute to increased conversion”. What’s more, as marketers and marketing teams are so often on the go, Monetate 11 allows its customers to test, target, and personalize their websites on the iPad, giving users that extra layer of mobile functionality. Another bonus: All current Monetate users will be automatically upgraded to the new version of its platform. Monetate 11, like its predecessors, aims to cut out the IT middleman by giving control of creating and measuring marketing campaigns and serving customized user experiences back to marketers. They simply enter the “who, what, when, why” of the campaign into the Monetate dashboard, and the platform takes care of the rest, offering users the ability to take advantage of campaign cloning, tagging, and filtering. Marketers will also be able to do automatic A/B testing against a control group, tracking the results in realtime, so that marketers can quickly see the impact their new campaigns will have. Users will also have the added benefit of new targeting options, including geotargeting to tailor messages and promotions to a visitor’s specific location, weather-based targeting, and behavioral targeting. Monetate customers will also now be able to test and deploy their own HTML and JavaScript, target recommendations based on complex business rules, and access all the data they need about traffic segments and purchasing patterns to make informed decisions about the promotions, messages, and other content they deliver to consumers through its analytics and reporting features. Monetate is really a no-brainer for eTailers and eCommerce marketers. It’s a great solution, and along with an infusion of new capital, the startup’s new version may very well have legs. After all, its platform has already attracted brands like Petco, Urban Outfitters, Sports Authority, QVC, Casual Male, Dick’s Sporting Goods, to use its targeting and testing services on their eCommerce platforms — and Brussin told us that the company has added hundreds of millions in collective revenue to these businesses, removing the need for businesses to hire specialized teams and decrease bounce rates and shopping cart abandonment.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last month, Ustream launched its video streaming service on the iPad. As Jason reported at the time, the app allows users to view live and recorded content streaming through the Web and even to stream their own footage directly from their iPad 2s.  The move was a big step forward for live, streaming video on tablet devices, especially in that the latter feature allows users to be couch videographers. Of course, since last year, Ustream has been working on a series of apps that give users the added benefit of video editing features that can turn couch videographers into pro video creators.  Today, Ustream is announcing a partnership with Telestream, the maker of digital media tools and workflow solutions, which will bring Telestream Wirecast live video production technology to all Ustream subscribers and add yet another layer to Ustream’s video editing solutions.  Last year, Ustream launched the first product in its “Producer Studio” line, which aims to turn a user’s PC into a live video production studio with video editing tools that add a professional look to a user’s streams. Since its initial launch in 2010, Ustream Producer products have attracted over 600,000 downloads. Today, Ustream and Telestream are launching a jointly-developed version 2.0 of its family of desktop streaming media applications, which adds a bunch of updates to all Producer products and sees the suite expanding to a total of three flavors. The triage now includes Ustream Producer, which can be used by any users for free, Ustream Producer Pro, a more advanced application available for $199, and the new Producer Studio, an app for pros starting at $549.  Each version of Ustream Producer will include a newly remodeled “Desktop Presenter”, which enables users to screencast desktops of any computer within their local network in broadcasts. Version 2.0 also adds audio capabilities, which allows Desktop Presenter, for example, to serve as a Skype client for web talk shows, which will likely be of particular interest to those participating in the growing gamecasting space. Producer also takes advantage of the new H.264 codec by MainConcept, as well as a built-in bandwidth meter that works to ensure that broadcasts remain in high video quality. In addition, some cool new features of the new Ustream Producer Studio include an audio mixer with sync delay, built-in support for HDV and IP cameras, integrated scoreboards for sports fans that can be viewed during live broadcast, and a new catalog of lower-thirds to help make broadcasts a little more professional looking.  The best part is that now both amateur and professional videographers will be able to take advantage of streaming content that incorporates music, image transitions, and picture-in-picture capability with a few clicks. Incorporating Telestream’s Wirecast architecture into Ustream’s products will now allow users to benefit from scalable, high-quality video production tools on both Mac and PC — and to create custom productions, regardless of one’s level of expertise. For more on Ustream Producer, visit the Producer Demo here, or check out the live demo below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Vizibility, provider of a personal branding platform for individuals and companies, this morning announced it has raised $1.3 million in seed funding, more than its $1 million target.  Launchpad Venture Group of Boston led the round and was joined by additional investors from Boston Harbor Angels, New York Angels and TiE Angels as well as a number of independent investors from the Northeast and Europe. Earlier backers also participated in the round. Vizibility was founded in 2009 and is headquartered in Manhattan, New York.  The company offers an online identity management platform for individuals and companies that enables them to curate and share their online identities, including personalized Google search results, professional profiles, contact information and more.  The company’s SearchMe buttons, links and QR codes can be shared and placed on websites, blogs, business cards, marketing material and whatnot. Its services are primarily distributed as an integrated feature of social networking sites, including job search, online reputation management and executive profile hubs as well as dating sites.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Music search and discovery company SoundHound has inked a deal with digital music service provider Spotify to enable SoundHound users in Europe to instantly access the latter’s catalogue (of over 15 million tracks). From the sound of it, the partnership doesn’t enable users outside of Europe to cross that particular bridge just yet. Starting today, SoundHound users on iOS and Android devices who also subscribe to Spotify Premium will be given the option to ‘Play Now in Spotify’ after identifying a song through the  music discovery and recognition service. That goes for users of both the free and the paid SoundHound apps. SoundHound users in Europe who don’t subscribe to Spotify Premium will be redirected to a page inviting them to become Spotify users before proceeding to listen to the track.  A direct Shazam (Encore) competitor, SoundHound’s ‘Sound2Sound’ technology searches sound against sound, thus bypassing traditional sound-to-text conversion techniques.  Headquartered in San Jose, California, SoundHound is backed by Global Catalyst Partners, TransLink Capital, Walden Venture Capital, and other Silicon Valley investors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes the need to test outweighs the need for total secrecy. I’m going to assume Color CEO Bill Nguyen shares that belief. The past two days his Facebook stream has been filled with some seemingly bland pictures. But they’re not bland — they’re test pictures. And they’re sent from a new app called “Blue”. I don’t know much about the app itself, but I was able to dig up a little bit of information — including the logo above. Judging from the name alone, I think it would be pretty safe to assume that this is at least one of the new projects the Color Labs team is working on after Color itself fizzled out. And there’s a bit more hinting at this being Color’s next project — namely that many of the developers listed on the Blue app Facebook page work at Color (and a number work at Apple as well, where Nguyen worked prior to Color Labs). The app currently has 29 monthly active users listed. A bit more: it appears that they settled on the “Blue” name recently after using the codename “TestJckJck” (seriously) for several weeks. You can find that Facebook app here, again with several Color/Apple people as developers. Nguyen has been testing TestJckJck on his own profile for some time now. Blue certainly has a better ring to it. My guess right now is that Blue is a new mobile app with deep ties into Facebook Photos. That’s interesting since Facebook may be working on their own stand-alone app in that regard. Earlier today, Nick Bilton reported that Facebook was readying a range of photo filters to use in a mobile app. This may all be related somehow. One more thing: the URL for Blue for Facebook contains “bluecolor”. Update: We’ve since confirmed with multiple sources that Blue will indeed be Color’s next app.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Real estate listings site Zillow reported its first earnings as a public company today, after debuting on the NASDAQ in mid-July. Zillow revealed record revenues of $15.8 million in the second quarter, up 116% year-over-year. Net Income for the quarter came in at $1.6 million, compared to a net loss of $2 million in the same period a year ago and a net loss of $0.8 in the first quarter of 2011. This quarter marked the company’s first quarter of GAAP profitability Zillow saw record Marketplace Revenues of $9.7 million, up 269% year-over-year. Premier Agent subscribers, which contribute to Marketplace revenues, totaled 13,385 at June 30, 2011, up 180% from 4,777 at the end of the second quarter of 2010.  Display revenues increased 30% to $6.1 million from $4.7 million in the second quarter of 2010. The company’s Average monthly unique users grew 93% to a record 20.8 million in the second quarter of 2011 compared to 10.8 million average monthly unique users for the same period in 2010. And July 2011 marked another record traffic month with 23.2 million unique users to Zillow’s websites and mobile applications, a 98% increase from July 2010. Zillow CEO Spencer Rascoff said of the company’s first earnings as a public company: “The second quarter was outstanding for Zillow with record revenues, traffic and mobile usage. It marks our first profitable quarter on a GAAP net income basis and our fourth consecutive profitable quarter on an Adjusted EBITDA basis..We’re extremely pleased with our progress and rapid growth, yet we believe we’ve only scratched the surface of our opportunity.” Profitability for the company is a big deal considering that while revenues were growing for Zillow, the company had been taking a loss each quarter for the past three years.  Zillow, which initially filed its S-1 in April, currently lists over 100 million U.S. homes, including homes for sale, homes for rent and homes not currently on the market. Zillow launched a mortgage marketplace in 2008, and subsequently expanded into  rentals and mobile. According to Experian Hitwise,  Zillow.com is the third most visited Real Estate site in the U.S and received 5.36% of Real Estate visits in March 2011, which is a 53% increase compared to March 2010.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Each year, I go to a lot of conferences. For each and every one I fumble around at the last minute to figure out the schedule, who’s going to be there, etc. When I get there, I trade business cards that I’ll probably never look at again just because there are hundreds of them and no good way to order that information. The logistics surrounding just attending are a pain. And it’s a much bigger pain when you’re helping to actually put one together. Enter Bloodhound. Bloodhound is a new mobile app launching today that aims to alleviate the pains of conference-going — for both attendees and those participating. One simplified way to think about it that investor Dave McClure likes to say is that it’s a “realtime ‘Where’s Waldo’ for conferences”. It’s actually a little surprising that one app hasn’t caught on in this space yet given the pain points. Most people see to either use the more general location services like Foursquare or more broad event planners like Plancast. Or worse, event organizers increasingly try to get you to download their own custom-built one-off app for their conference. These are annoying because you usually have them on your phone for one or two days and then delete them forever. So the prospect of keeping some potentially valuable data is nada. Bloodhound focuses specifically on large events/conferences in aggregate. They want to be the one app you use for each one. To make that happen, they give anyone (ideally an event organizer, but it can be just an attendee too) a simple web-based tool to add an event to their directory. Once you do this, you can input more detailed information or if it’s publicly available, Bloodhound will look for it to build out a comprehensive event area for their app. Once the information is in the app, the app shines as a way to access and trade information leading up to and at the event. Did you meet someone there that you’d like to connect with later? Instead of trading business cards, why not use the app to follow them on LinkedIn and/or Facebook. Or you can just shoot them a pre-populated email with your information with one click. Bloodhound also focuses on realtime recommendations for things you might like at a particular event. For example, if it knows you’ve attended an event earlier in the year with certain types of vendors, it may recommend that you check out certain sessions at the event you’re currently attending. They can do this because they’re more than a one-off app. As you might imagine, these recommendations as well as connections are also interesting to the exhibitors at the events. Meanwhile, promotion of the events themselves within the app will be interesting to conference organizers. There’s certainly potential revenue to be had for Bloodhound down the line. The company has been testing their apps in private beta for the last six months at a handful of events. Currently, over 300 events are using Bloodhound, with over 1,000 expected next month. Today will see the launch of their iPhone app, as well as basic Android and BlackBerry apps. They’ll also have a full mobile HTML5 site — this is key since they don’t want just a certain percentage of conference attendees with one type of device to have access. The startup has raised $250,000 from McClure’s 500 Startups, Jason Portnoy, and Jay Weintraub. The founders are Anthony Krumeich, Rick Fulton, and Patrick Dugan. This slideshow requires JavaScript. Latest headlines delivered to you daily E-commerce platform Tinypay.me, which emerged from 2010’s Le Web conference as a sort of Twitter for e-commerce, has just raised $1 million from Aksoy Internet Ventures. The money will be used, in part, to relocate company headquarters from the Netherlands to the heart of the action: San Francisco. Tinypay.me bills itself as the easiest way to sell stuff online, since all you have to do to start selling is fill out a single form. The entire process takes just 60 seconds, the company says. To use Tinypay.me, you fill out the form, notify your friends on Facebook and Twitter, and accept payments via PayPal. The service supports both physical and digital goods and generates a page that can be embedded into websites. No account is needed to use the service, as everything is handled through your e-mail. Says co-founder and CEO Melvin Tercan, the team is moving to Silicon Valley because “our mission is to conquer the world and there’s no better place to start than here.” Chairman Taner Aksoy of Aksoy Internet Ventures, a Turkish-based investment firm, also commented that he thinks Tinypay.me “will be a big hit globally.” Adds Tercan, Tinypay.me chose Aksoy Internet Ventures “because they have more than 10 years experience with building Sahibinden.com, the largest classified site in Turkey.” “They’re able to help us with a lot of experience and advice to grow the company,” he says. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve written about StackMob twice, both times calling it the “Heroku For Mobile” in the title. Yeah, “X For Y” titles are pretty lame. But I mean, that’s pretty much exactly what StackMob is — and they embrace it. In fact, they embrace it so much that today they’re announcing a key partnership with… wait for it… Heroku! StackMob is integrating with Heroku as an add-on that extends the mobile platform to all Ruby developers on Heroku. This means APIs, OAuth, Push Notifications, and analytics for mobile are all coming over in the integration. With these easy-to-implement solutions, developers can spend less time worrying about backend development for both desktop and mobile and more time worrying about frontend implementation. “As the mobile market continues to grow, we see not only more data-driven applications being built but ones with more complex data,” says StackMob CEO and co-founder Ty Amell. “These highly interactive apps require code to process data on servers instead of on devices. The Heroku add-on allows StackMob to extend its technology to Ruby developers so they can focus on building feature-rich applications.” StackMob says that other features such as social integration and Node.js support will be coming soon. They’re also offering up a $1,000 prize for the best mobile app built using both StackMob and Heroku during the Dreamforce Hackathon. Even though StackMob is still in private beta, all Heroku users that want access will get it with the partnership. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFounding Napkin LabsRiley Gibson is the CEO and co-founder of the Boulder based Napkin Labs, a startup that helps companies manage and engage their Facebook fans and Twitter followers. Napkin Labs launched an updated version of the service today (read, Napkin Labs Lets Brands Better Understand Their Customers (And Turn Them Into Collaborators). Prior to launch, Gibson flew to New York to get advice on building his company during Founder Office Hours with Hunch Co-Founder Chris Dixon and First Round Capital’s Managing Partner Josh Kopelman. Based in Colorado, Gibson suspects his company might be at a disadvantage because it is not located near vast sources of venture capital. He wonders if moving will help. Kopelman doesn’t think so and responds by saying, “I am not sure it makes sense to move to be near a VC … I think you tend to move if you are finding that you are starved for talent, if you are not able to hire to fill the positions at the right levels. We’ve funded companies all over the country.” Dixon chimes in with a tongue-in-cheek response that it is often better to move away from sources of venture capital. Following the exchange, Gibson asks Dixon and Kopelman about raising money. The question is should Napkin Labs attempt to achieve certain benchmarks before raising money, or should it not worry about the benchmarks and just go for it? Dixon and Kopelman take a similar position, with Kopelman saying “it probably makes sense to have just a handful of conversations, test the appetite and responsiveness of investors.” He notes that you don’t turn fundraising on and off, but rather it is a continuous process of engaging backers. Make sure to watch the entire video for additional insights along with prior episodes of Founder Office Hours featuring Dispatch.io, Schedit and Profitably. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online and mobile payment platform Dwolla just launched a new feature called “Proxi” which allows users to send and receive cash-based mobile payments based on their current proximity to another connected device. The technology bypasses the need for special hardware, like Square’s plastic dongles or NFC chips built into a phone, in order to make mobile payments. Instead, the interface provides a simple way for Dwolla’s users to find nearby contacts and send them money using only the mobile app itself. Dwolla, for those unaware, is a company with a unique take on digital payments. Its vision is that consumers, not third-parties, should dictate how their payments network operates. What this means for Dwolla and its users is a payments network that’s devoid of personal information. And most importantly, Dwolla’s inroad to this planned disruption is cash, an under-represented market in electronic payments. Dwolla’s “Proxi” Beta With the new “Proxi” (beta) feature, Dwolla founder Ben Milne explains that the company is looking to accomplish much of the same thing that NFC makes possible, but without the need for expensive hardware. With NFC, there’s added security, because you have to be physically present to pay. Proxi uses GPS for that same reason. When launching Proxi, the mobile app pulls up a list of those who are close to you and able to accept payments, including both nearby users and merchants. And like everything else Dwolla does, Proxi considers users’ security first. For example, you can control whether you want to be visible only to your contacts or to a wider range of Dwolla users, you can control how long you will be visible, and you can control the distance at which you are visible, with settings for 300 ft., 1 mile or 5 miles. The Proxi beta will initially be available on iOS, and will roll out to other mobile platforms (Android, Windows Phone) in the coming weeks. The beta is private for now, but TechCrunch readers can request immediate access here: https://www.dwolla.com/proxi/beta. There will be limited spots available, so access is on a first-come, first-serve basis.  Pros and Cons of the Dwolla System Proxi is the sort of feature that could take Dwolla from “interesting idea” territory to becoming a more practical application. Secure, person-to-person (or person-to-business) mobile payments without the high fees associated with PayPal, or the need for special hardware? Sounds good here. The only drawback is that Dwolla doesn’t directly connect to your own bank account, in the same way that your debit card does, which could confuse first-time users who don’t understand why other financial institutions are involved. Instead, Dwolla has partnerships with The Veridian Group, a subsidiary of Veridian Credit Union, in Waterloo, Iowa, and The Members Group (TMG) another financial and credit union service organization owned by Iowa credit unions and their members. Through these organizations’, which hold the funds in Dwolla’s users’ accounts, people can send and receive money from their own bank accounts. And while Dwolla is easy to use, it’s hardly available for use everywhere, the way that your debit would be. Finally, although Dwolla’s fees aren’t outrageous, they are present. Dwolla has a flat 25-cents per transaction fee, regardless of the transaction amount. That’s lower than PayPal’s 30-cents per transaction fee. There’s also no additional percentage amount per transaction, even though PayPal currently charges an additional 2.9% for transactions under $3,000. Dwolla currently has 40,000 users, with user-to-user transactions representing the highest volume of transactions and B2B transactions representing the highest dollar value. The company will be rolling out more technologies over the month of September, so stay tuned.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new startup called Booktrack launched this morning (actually, the NYT launched it yesterday), in an effort to create a whole new genre of e-books. Booktrack creates synchronized soundtracks for e-books that aim to “dramatically boost the reader’s imagination and engagement”.  The startup’s technology pairs music scores and sound effects with text, automatically paced to one’s reading speed. Booktracks can be downloaded for iPad, iPhone and iPod touch, and Android apps are on the way. Check out the Booktrack Bookshelf for available titles. The company has teamed up with Sony/ATV Music Publishing, Park Road Post, and Full Fathom Five, and its technology is already fully integrated in the new novel ‘The Power of Six’ by Pittacus Lore (James Frey), published by HarperCollins Children’s Books. Booktrack and publishers will share profits with participating authors, composers, and musicians, the company said in a press release. Booktrack is backed by former PayPal and early Facebook investor (and longtime board member) Peter Thiel as well as authors who will be collaborating with the company. Other initial investors in and advisors to Booktrack include Mark D’Arcy, Director of Global Creative Solutions at Facebook, and Derek Handley, CEO and cofounder of mobile marketing and media company The Hyperfactory.  The latter will also serve as Booktrack’s chairman. Paul Cameron, Booktrack’s co-founder and CEO, in the press release compares e-books in their current form with ‘movies with no soundtrack’, but I’m not sure I agree with that statement – reading is an entirely different way of consuming content. I’m not sure a soundtrack attached to an e-book can do anything but distract from the reading experience, actually. Of course, I’ve only briefly tested Booktrack’s technology with a single e-book, so I haven’t entirely made up my mind yet about its potential to disrupt the e-book genre. Wired’s Charlie Sorrel, for one, thinks the idea stinks. He makes a good case, but that won’t (and shouldn’t) stop the company from trying, evidently. In the coming weeks and months, Booktrack says it will publish a specially-curated compendium of short stories from some of the top authors in the world, starting in September with ‘In the South’ by Salman Rushdie. Booktrack will also release editions of classics, including titles such as The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn, The Tale of Peter Rabbit, Peter Pan, The Three Musketeers, Pride and Prejudice, Jane Eyre, Romeo and Juliet and more. I’m very much looking forward to reading Paul Carr‘s thoughts on this one.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social networks like Facebook and Twitter act as truly effective channels by which companies can interact with their customers and receive near-instantaneous feedback on their products and brands. Of course, the information obtained by way of social networks can still be somewhat of a fire hose.  While  social networks provide surfeit casual feedback for brands to take advantage of, they often lack the kind of deep insight into product development, design concepts, or what a company might be doing to better serve its customer base. Companies want to be more effective in communicating with their active user base and valued customers in a collaborative way that actually leads to better products and a better user experience, rather than the alternative.  Today, Napkin Labs is launching a new version of its platform that aims to tackle this problem by creating an online lab space that functions as a collaborative community in which customers can exercise their creative muscles and work together to make their favorite brands even more appealing. Essentially, Napkin Labs is working to turn valued customers into a creative army by way of a platform that offers them a set of activities (read: apps) that integrate game dynamics and intuitive design that make it easy (and enjoyable) to incubate new ideas and let their opinions be heard. Not unlike IDEO, these apps work towards encouraging an efficient forum in which to spitball ideas about the design process, crowdsourcing that process in such a way that users are encouraged to become designers, marketers, and product developers all at once — giving customers the opportunity to become more intimately involved in the evolution of their favorite brands and products. Each company or brand can create its own lab, in which Napkin’s apps lead customers through a series of simple questions intended to get to the core of a product’s intended experience, as well as allowing brands to solicit more nuanced and targeted feedback — or go even further by encouraging fans to create video renderings of their suggestions and using video to create fact-finding missions. These customizable app experiences enable brands to understand their customers from a variety of different perspectives and to drive home the idea of real collaboration between brand and customer.  And since every project is game-ified, contributors are rewarded with “influence points” for every suggestion they make, ranking them on a public leaderboard that can be viewed by every participating user. At the end of the design process, each user is offered a reward chosen by the company, whether that be cash, merchandise, or a merit badge.  Companies can further customize the user experience of their product development labs with welcome messages, logos, colors, and various backgrounds, as well as choosing the types of activities users can engage in — like refining an advertising campaign, for example — all in an effort to make the design process more enjoyable and more suitable to driving constructive feedback and iteration.  Another aspect that sets Napkin Labs apart from its competitors is that its platform is really an off-the-shelf solution that can be used by anyone from a single designer to large corporations. Napkin Labs offers a pricing scheme in which businesses pay $99 per month for basic features — all the way to $499 per month for a complete custom experience for individual companies. The startup’s easy-to-use and clean UI encouraged companies like the Sony Design Center and Google to become early private beta customers of Napkin Labs. Google, for one, used the platform to test ideas for GoogleTV, especially in relation to how younger customers are using web TV in digital media’s changing landscape, according to Napkin Labs Co-founder and CEO Riley Gibson.  For smaller companies that can’t afford to hire a roster of designers and ad specialists for early-stage products, Napkin Labs creates an easy (and cheaper) solution by bringing customers into the game to participate in product iteration and ideation — an approach that may very well prove to be a great approach to building brand loyalty.  It’s an interesting platform. Chime in to let us know what you think. For more, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily ePals, developer of a social learning network, this morning announced that it has acquired Newstogram, maker of a media personalization and content recommendation platform. Also included in the deal was news site DailyMe – both are businesses owned by a company called Nexify. The transaction was in ePals stock and amounted to about $3 million. ePals says the acquisition provides it with a robust platform for personalization of media and learning applications, and enhances its capability to match learners with each other based on interests, across its network of approximately 700,000 classrooms and ‘millions of users’ in 200 countries. The platform will allow media publishers – including more than 20 media companies that currently use the Newstogram platform – to create ‘educational’ pages that highlight their content. Newstogram / DailyMe founder and CEO Eduardo Hauser will become president of ePals’s Media division, while chief product officer Neil Budde joins at EVP. Before starting Nexify, Hauser was EVP of Latin America for AOL and VP News and Information at Venevision. Neil Budde previously was the founding editor and publisher of The Wall Street Journal Online, and VP and Editor in Chief of Yahoo! News, Finance and Sports. ePals CEO Miles Gilburne also used to be an executive at AOL, by the way. A venture capitalist, he served for five years as SVP of Corporate Development for AOL before stepping down from those duties in December 1999. He was elected to the board of directors of AOL in 1999 and continued to serve on the board of directors of Time Warner, until stepping down in May 2006.  ePals issued to Nexify 4,449,686 restricted common voting shares at a price of US$0.67 per share. In addition, ePals issued to Nexify warrants to acquire an additional 307,000 restricted voting common shares, at the same price. The warrants are exercisable up to 4 years from the date of closing.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sequoia-backed Inkling, a startup that develops an innovative digital textbook platform, is is releasing version 2.0 of its technology, which comes with increased collaboration and sharing features.  As we’ve written in the past, Inkling’s technology delivers interactive textbooks that include the ability to collaborate, add multimedia and communicate within content. The startup adds another layer to online textbooks by adding 3-D objects, video, quizzes, and even social interaction within the content.  Inkling’s sync technology lets students collaborate in real time by sharing their notes and highlights with one another. And students can see comments from their friends and professors right alongside their own notes. The newest version of the platform has made established ‘Study Groups’ within tectbooks, where students can ask questions and add comments anywhere in the book with classmates, professors and others who are reading the same book using Inkling. Inkling has also added ‘expert’ notes to the book, allowing students to get access to their notes and comments. All notes, highlights, bookmarks and links created by students are now saved in a designated notebook. And search results within Inkling’s platform from Wikipedia or Google appear directly in your book, which can also be saved to a notebook.   Currently, Inkling has fifty adopting educational institutions requiring the e-textbook platform. And the company announced funding and partnerships from some of the top educational publishers, including Pearson and McGraw Hill.  Of course, the e-textbook space is competitive with Chegg, Kno, Amazon and many others all competing in the arena. But Inkling founder and CEO Matt MacInnis isn’t too worried. While he admits that some competitors have more content, he believes that Inkling’s platform is the most interactive, engaging technology on the market. For now, MacInnis is sticking to the iPad as Inkling’s platform of choice, but will eventually expand to other devices.  The company has also attracted big venture money as well. A few weeks ago, Inkling announced a $17 million round, bringing the startup’s total funding to $32 million, including its Seed and Series A rounds as well as the multi-million dollar infusion from publishers.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Druva, the creator of data protection solutions for SMEs, announced this morning that it has raised $12 million in series B funding. The round was led by Nexus Venture Partners, with participation from existing investor, Sequoia Capital. Jishnu Bhattacharjee of Nexus Venture Partners will be joining Druva’s board of directors as a result of this investment, joining Sequoia Capital Managing Director Shailendra Singh, Ramani Kothandaraman, Co-founder and COO of Druva, and and Yoram Novick, CEO and founder of Topio.  The series B round adds to the $5 million Druva raised in April of 2010, bringing total investment to just north of $17 million. The startup’s new infusion of capital will be used to expand sales across North America, Europe, and Asia.  Founded in 2007, the Mountain View-based enterprise company now has more than 800 customers, protecting more than 300,000 laptops and devices across the globe, and is beginning to thrive in a market in which it faces competition from the likes of EMC Avamar, Symantec, and Autonomy.  Druva’s inSync software (its flagship product) allows companies to take advantage of automated backups of laptops, smartphones, and tablets, protecting corporate data for both in-office and remote users. The software also allows enterprises to retrieve data and make one-click restores of any file or “backup volume from a browser or iOS and Android devices”, according to the Druva team.  The startup’s value proposition is that it offers backups over LAN, WAN, and VPN networks and makes backups more efficient by de-duplicating data — in other words, storing only a single copy of files and data uploaded by a network’s users. This de-duplication allows Druva’s backups to rank at speeds ten times those of its competitors, and enables companies to save 90 percent on bandwidth and storage, while maintaining high rates of accuracy for both Outlook and Office applications. Druva’s software also gives enterprises the option to store their data on location, in the cloud, or via web-connected data centers. According to Sheila Childs, Vice President of Research at Gartner, enterprise organizations are beginning to become aware of the inadequate protection of important data on corporate laptops and mobile devices. As mobile workers are integral to the success of many businesses and carry data that would be nearly impossible to reconstruct if their corporate device were damaged or stolen, she said, solutions like that offered by Druva are becoming essential to SMEs looking to secure their sensitive data. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online video platform company Brightcove this morning announced that it has filed a registration statement on Form S-1 with the SEC in connection with a proposed IPO of its common stock. The company is looking to raise up to $50 million through the offering. Brightcove offers cloud-based solutions for publishing and distributing video and other digital media.  Brightcove’s revenue grew from $24.5 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2008, to $43.7 million in the fiscal year ended December 31, 2010, the filing reveals.  Revenue came in at $28.4 million for the six months ended June 30, 2011. The company’s isn’t profitable – they report a net loss of $9.7 million for the first half of this year – and Brightcove says it doesn’t expect to be in the black until the end of 2012. The company says in the filing that it had close to 3,300 customers in over 50 countries as of June 30, 2011, including The New York Times Company, Oracle, AOL, Philips Electronics, Macy’s, Bank of America, the U.S. Army and Honda. It currently has close to 300 employees. The company also reveals that it signed a new lease for over 80,000 square feet of office space in Boston, Massachusetts. The company says it expects to move into its new HQ on April 1, 2012. In May 2011, Brightcove announced the release of ‘App Cloud’, a software application development and management platform designed to help customers publish and distribute video through software apps across multiple Internet-connected devices. The company says it expect its first commercial sale in the second half of 2011. Brightcove filed to list on the NASDAQ Global Market under the ticker “BCOV”.  Whether this is the right time to file for an IPO is up for debate, of course. Due to the global economic turmoil, a bunch of recent IPO candidates just decided to delay their offerings. Brightcove’s offering is being made through Morgan Stanley, Stifel Nicolaus, RBC Capital Markets, Pacific Crest Securities, and Raymond James. The company’s list of investors include Accel Partners, General Catalyst Partners, Allen & Company, IAC and Hearst Ventures, among others. Also read: Brightcove Streaming 700 Million Videos A Month; Granted Broad Patent For Online Video Latest headlines delivered to you daily Twitter co-founders Biz Stone, Evan Williams, and longtime sidekick Jason Goldman, recently shifted their focus away from the micro-sharing service provider to reboot Obvious, the company that originally incubated Twitter.  Yesterday, Stone announced Obvious’ first project: incubating an app development company called Lift, created by Tony Stubblebine and Jon Crosby. Obvious says it will assist Lift with “strategy, design, funding and recruiting”. What Lift is building remains unclear, but Stone writes: “Tony Stubblebine and Jon Crosby have created an interesting new application for unlocking human potential through positive reinforcement. We love this software for what it does, and because we’ve tried it and it works.” Crosby says more will be shared “in the coming months”. If you’re interested in learning more now: Marshall Kirkpatrick has been sleuthing and writes about what he found on ReadWriteWeb. Stubblebine previously worked at Wesabe, Odeo (where he worked with the Obvious trio) and O’Reilly Media and also founded CrowdVine. Crosby boasts gigs at Path, Engine Yard and Songbird on his résumé. Lift will be billed as an ‘Obvious Company’, although the Obvious team clearly sees this more as a partnership, wherein Lift gets to follow its own path under the leadership of Stubblebine and Crosby. Its service is currently in private alpha, but the website lets people sign up to receive more information when it’s available. Oh, and you’ll be able to log in through Twitter and Facebook. As an amusing aside: entrepreneur and hacker Connor Montgomery, and/or Stubblebine, appear to have added some humor to the Lift website code: (meta name=”description” content=”Lift. Achieve anything (assuming we finish building this app).”) I assume they will. Can’t wait to finally be able to achieve anything! Latest headlines delivered to you daily This afternoon Y Combinator kicked off the summer session of Demo Day, the twice-a-year event where the prestigious startup incubator showcases its latest batch of companies in front of a throng of investors. And wow, was this one a doozy. 63 companies — easily besting Y Combinator’s previous record of 43 — took the stage today for rapid-fire, 2 minute presentations that lasted three and a half hours, including some brief breaks. As usual, dozens of top investors from around Silicon Valley filled the hall (with a lengthy wait list for those who didn’t sign up in time), and they didn’t come away disappointed. Though there were more companies than ever, the quality was still very high — I suspect this batch will have more home runs than any previous batch. Y Combinator cofounder and partner Paul Graham said that the acceptance rate was still a low 3%, but that the incubator is now receiving a huge number of applications, many of which are promising — hence the increased class size. In light of the growth of the program, Y Combinator decided to knock down a wall in their building and boost the size of their event room. It is a welcome upgrade. Given the large number of startups presenting, YC also built a basic web application to help the investors keep track of which companies they wanted to speak to — investors simply hit a ‘Like’ button next to a company’s name, and the founders get notified that someone wants to talk to them. For this batch, YC also took a different approach to pre-Demo Day funding. Historically, Y Combinator has sometimes held an Angel Day, when certain angel investors were invited to invest in companies prior to the larger Demo Day event. This sometimes led to some companies being off the market, so to speak, with over-subscribed rounds or no-shop clauses. This time, things are different — every company presenting is open to raising money. Of course, all of the companies also have plenty of runway thanks to Yuri Milner’s Start Fund and SV Angel — which are collectively investing $150,000 in nearly every company in the current batch (Start Fund began investing in the last batch, and announced participation in this batch at TechCrunch Disrupt NYC). One thing to note: while there were a whopping 63 demos today, a significant number of them were off the record, so they aren’t included in this post. Aisle50 has a straightforward pitch: Groupon for groceries. The company says that packaged goods business is worth 2 trillion. Food manufacturers like Procter & Gamble, General Mills, and Kraft spend $35 billion a year on marketing, half of which goes to free-standing inserts (those paper flyers in newspapers that are loaded with grocery products). But as these brands move to digital, they don’t want to be placed next to competitors on the page. Aisle50 lets them have the spotlight — you see one new product per day, which includes custom copy introducing the product (similar to the way Groupon does it). Buy one, and the site loads your grocery store rewards card with the deal. The company has deals with Lowes Foods, SuperValu, other major grocery chains. Launchpad wants to be the new “Lego of digital play”. Kids love to create new things using clay and Lincoln Logs, Erector Sets and more, and so Launchpad wants to recreate this experience for kids on digital devices, starting with iOS. Launchpad’s first app, Toontastic, captures creative storytelling and allows kids to create their own cartoons. They can move their cartoon characters around a touchscreen, record audio, and on Launchpad’s “ToonTube”, kids can then watch the cartoons they’ve created in video album form. Apple recently added Launchpad Toys to the App Store’s Hall of Fame. See our full post on Interview Street’s launch here Interview Street is a platform for identifying promising programming candidates, using programming puzzles that are better than (and easier for companies to administer) than typical programming puzzles. Companies that are already using the platform include Facebook, Amazon, and Zynga. Interview Street typically earns $10,000 for each programmer hired (each company is charged based on how many tests are taken). Looking to build the biggest database of programmer data. They’re doubling revenue each month and are profitable. See our past coverage of MixRank here MixRank has created a spy tool for AdSense. What does this mean? MixRank’s search engine for Google’s Adsense crawls all web pages running Google’s ad tool — and because Google then sorts these ads by how effective they are — the startup indexes that data and estimates how well they’re performing for their customers. As we wrote in June, MixRank’s service yields a ton of interesting data for advertisers. Using the startup’s dashboard, users can see that, of the different wordings for their Google ads (for example) one particular ad copy phrasing has been far more successful than its other pilots. MixRank uses its Google data, combined with its own crawling to serve businesses with performance analytics. DoubleRecall is a platform that allows companies to easily roll out digital brand-building campaigns that “actually prompt users to read an ad”. A news article might include, for example, an ad that asks users to pick out two words and enter them in the textbox below. It isn’t a huge hassle, and it works — in some cases well enough to make it so that the publisher doesn’t need a paywall. An initial customer is Forbes. This format is 11 times more effective than typical display ads. Publishers get more revenue, advertisers get remembered, and, users get free content with fewer ads. The startup got its start in Europe, where it made 150k in 3 months. Have signed Impre Media, Addmired, Forbes, Conde Nast, Pe.com. See our full coverage of Envolve’s launch here Envolve offers customizable chat for websites. The service powers chat on 28,000 sites. Sites can install Envolve in two lines of JavaScript, and users that interact with the chat spend 4x time-on-site. Chat messages per day growing 29% month over month for the last 13 months, with users sending a total of 300,000 chat messages a day. UMG, Mitsubishi, Wired all use the platform. See our full coverage of Quarty’s launch here Quartzy is an online marketplace for Life Science supplies. The life science consumables market is $9 billion, with 500,000 scientists buying from 1000 suppliers. But they don’t do a good job managing their inventories, they use things like Google Docs. Quartzy helps labs manage their inventories. “What we are doing is a little bit devious” — the site need only add a ‘buy’ button, and its inventory system becomes a marketplace. See our full coverage of Munch on Me’s launch here Munch On Me has a simple value proposition: It wants to take the daily deals model scaled by Groupon and LivingSocial and apply it to the restaurant industry to be, simply, your go-to resource for “deals on dishes”. From the customer’s side, Munch On Me wants to help restaurants get discovered, offering a marketing solution for local restaurants that allow them to control the customer dining experience and even upsell their customers. According to the startup’s pitch, 75 percent of customers even go on to buy something at full price. While Groupon and LivingSocial are more one-size-fits-all solutions (targeting bargain hunters), Munch On Me is going after customer retention, touting an 100 percent merchant retention rate and are doubling revenue every month. See our full coverage of Debteye’s launch here Debteye is offering an automated credit counseling platform to those suffering from credit debt. It may sound like an obscure idea, but according to Debteye, which we covered in July, 10 million people spend over $2 billion on debt counseling and credit programs to help them extricate themselves from debt. Of course, the problem is that debt counseling solutions are labor and time intensive, so Debteye brings an easy automated software tool to the space that analyzes customer finances, recommends plans of actions for its customers, and even negotiates with creditors. Debteye wants to condense a 3-day ordeal into 7 minutes — and so far, it’s been working. Debteye has a has saved customers an average of $7K on expensive solutions, thanks to a team composed of debt counselors. See our full coverage of Paperlinks here Paperlinks has a simple pitch: the startup wants to be the go-to QR code resource for business and brands — but with a particular focus on the design of the code itself. Paperlinks turns posters into virtual vending machines, allowing users to scan a link with a QR code reader, giving its customers a UX similar to that of a custom native app to scan any link they want, pay for it, and walk to the retailer to pick it up. Bada bing, bada boom. So far, customers are buying the value proposition, as sales have been doubling every month, with clients including Nestle, Live Nation, and GNC, among others. After all, the technology is getting close to reaching a tipping point: 14 million Americans scanned a QR code in June. Check out our full coverage of PageLever here. Facebook has a lot of brands and businesses using Facebook Pages, but the social networking giant’s internal analytics aren’t great. PageLever is trying to make Facebook analytics better by allowing users to easily track Facebook Page activity over time; for example, “did that status update about a new deal fade quickly, or were people still commenting on it a day after it was posted?” So far the company has attracted Disney, Starbucks, YouTube, and other brands to sign on, enabling these companies to track how their users are behaving after they become fans. PageLever is currently growing at 50 percent per week, with $25K in recurring revenue so far, and plans to scale aggressively as social continues to be built into the fundamental plumbing of the Web. Find our full coverage of MarketBrief’s launch here. MarketBrief takes those hard-to-read SEC files and automatically converts them into news articles that are far more readable and easy to digest than the obtuse files produced by the SEC. Public companies have to report everything they do — last year there were 8.5 million pages of SEC filings — but those docs are hard to consume; but, with MarketBrief, those docs can be translated into articles in under one minute. The founders are the same guys behind SECWatch, which provided a rapidly-updated index of SEC filings but without the articles, that they founders have folded into MarketBrief. This is similar to what Narrative Science is doing for GameChanger. Check out our launch coverage of Snapjoy here Snapjoy wants to be the place where you keep all of your photos — in the cloud. What’s the use case here? Well, take the much-touted new iCloud from your friends at Apple: While iCloud does in fact offer photo sync, an important feature, Apple’s new cloud isn’t really going big and trying to become the home for your photos, as they’ll only be keeping your photos in the cloud for thirty days. In comparison, Snapjoy organizes photos for its users, combining cloud storage with automatic photo organization. Snapjoy launched 15 days ago and its 2,500 users have already uploaded 1.8 million photos, which is an average of over 700 photos per person. “Our market is anyone with photos worth saving”, said Snapjoy Co-founder Michael Dwan. Check out our full coverage of Opez’s launch here Opez wants to be Yelp for service professionals to attack an important problem: when small, independent service professionals, like hairstylists or bartenders or DJs move between venues, they often have difficulty taking their clientele with them. Essentially, Opez tells users who a particular service professional is, where they work, and gives them the ability to easily leave reviews. Opez wants to drive a shift in the balance of power in favor of employees from the venues themselves. Opez users can also follow, say, a particular bartender, allowing the bartender to send them promotions, coupons, etc., and generally just keep them up to date on recent news and relevant info. Opez also offers their users their own branded business cards, allowing them to distribute their own brand more virally. The startup wants to turn independent professionals into their own Groupons, according to co-founder Chris Tam. Bushido is an app store for the cloud. Built on APIs and databases like AWS, Mailgun, and others, Bushido allows developers to focus on their own applications by taking the hassle out of the development process by wrapping the app in centralized authentication, hosting, billing distribution — things developers often don’t want to deal with. Bushido becomes the install button for the internet. Then all the users who use that app, become Bushido users, and then they have access to other apps on the network without having to sign up again. Data that flows into Bushido stays there. So far, users have launched 8k of instances of apps. Check out full coverage of Stypi here Stypi is a startup that is reminiscent of Etherpad, which was acquired by Google back in 2009. Stypi is focusing on becoming a way for people to take advantage of realtime code collaboration and extend realtime sync between native applications. Eventually, Stypi hopes to make all native applications collaborate. Check out full coverage of Proxino here Proxino is a ‘smart JavaScript proxy’ that helps developers track the errors that occur in the client-side code of users’ browsers. Proxino’s tool scans JavaScript code so that it catches any errors and then notifies developers when something goes wrong. Proxino also minifies and caches code to increase speed. You can find our launch coverage of MongoHQ here MongoHQ offers hosted Mongo databases in the cloud, allowing developers to outsource common tasks like deployments, backups, scaling, optimization, web tools, analytics, and business intelligence that’s associated with their Mongo database. . The company is already closing in on $50K in monthly recurring revenue, with revenue growing 13.2% per week (they’re profitable). Investors include Maynard Webb (LiveOps) and Scott McNealy (Sun Microsystems). Zigfu is developing a solution for developers that makes it easy to create motion-enabled apps (especially for Microsoft Kinect). Zigfu’s OpenNI installer allows developers to set up their development environments in one click, bundling OpenNI, NITE, and SensorKinect and configuring them automatically. The startup wants to make it simpler for developers to hack on Kinect and create motion apps as well as distribute them more easily to its users. So far, over 100 developers and engineers have signed up to use their tools. For full TC coverage, click here Parse is Heroku for mobile apps. The service provides a backend for mobile applications in minutes, allowing mobile developers to avoid having to rewrite networking, caching, and sync tools, but with Parse’s SDK, developers don’t have to think about servers or server code. As of now, Parse supports both Android and iOS, and solves any drama that might be apparent in developing for the two OSes. Parse taps into a trend that’s been on the rise since AWS in 2006. Parse has been in private beta for 11 weeks and has raised $1.4 million raised so far. Check out our full coverage of Parse’s launch here Science Exchange is an online marketplace for outsourcing science experiments. Scientists are increasingly outsourcing experiments, and Science Exchange allows them to outsource their experiments to facilities that have specialized equipment that may not be available at their university. Science Exchange has had over 1,000 scientists that have outsourced over $100,000 in experimental services so far. Nature (one of the top science journals) says: “Totally disruptive. It could transform the way in which scientists do research”. You can find our full coverage of Verbling’s launch here If you’re like the average language learner, retaining new language information is difficult, because, by and large, language learning is tedious. Verbling allows language learners to practice with each other through live video. It instantly connects users with people learning Spanish in realtime, with 9K people having signed up for languages that aren’t even available yet. Traditionally, geographical distance between native speakers and learners is a huge obstacle in effectively learning a new language, so Verbling hopes to eliminate that issue by offering an easy realtime video solution. You can find our full coverage of MobileWorks here MobileWorks lets you outsource tasks to workers abroad. The company handles the selection of these workers, promising that all of its outsourced labor is high-quality because of its screening process, reputation, and error control. The majority of crowdsourcing engines today fall into around ten buckets, like document digitization, web scraping, and speech recognition and MobileWorks allows you to take advantage of them all. Check out our prior coverage of Vidyard here Vidyard is YouTube for business. The “YouTube rabbit hole”, says Vidyard, drives a business’ embedded video traffic (or clicks) off the site to YouTube. And there on YouTube, the comment for BlackBerry Playbook, for example, might contain a few negative comments, and an in-video ad might be the only way to drive customers back to the business’ website. Vidyard wants to create a “best practices solution” for all businesses using online video. The startup has raised $570K from SV Angel, Dennis Kavelman (the former COO of RIM), among others. You can find our prior coverage of Tagstand here. Tagstand is an NFC platform that lets you order customized tags that include a bit.ly-like short URL service that lets you modify the URL each NFC points to after they’ve been deployed in the field by using an online dashboard (this dashboard also lets you track analytics for each individual stickers). The company is currently seeing a tripling in monthly revenues. Check out our prior coverage of Kicksend here Kicksend is the easiest way to send and receive files with people you care about. Kicksend aims to make it even easier to send and share large files, especially with one’s non-technical friends and family members. Obviously, there are plenty of file sharing services available, but many of them are confusing to use or have needlessly complicated UIs, are expensive, or come with too much fine print. As we wrote a few weeks ago, “users can sign up for an account or just login with their Facebook account to view which of their friends and family are already using Kicksend. Once a user is logged in, they follow a simple three-step process to send the files. Simply drag and drop the files (of any size) into the interface/prompt on Kicksend’s homepage and select the recipients, (the recipients need only an email address, they don’t have to be Kicksend users), and, then, press send. Pretty straightforward.” Vimessa lets you send video messages to anyone in the world. Vimessa Co-founder Peter Clark said that he likes to think of Vimessa as “video voicemail”, bringing the convenience of SMS to the “magic of Skype video”. Vimessa intends to be at the center of the front-facing camera revolution. You can find our coverage on Can’t Wait’s launch here. Can’t Wait is a social network for video trailers. Can’t Wait sends you reminders when your favorite movies are launching in theaters, allowing users to buy tickets right from the native iPhone app. The app’s closest competitor is trailers.apple.com itself, but the only way to track the updates through Apple is via its RSS feed. You can find our prior coverage on Codecademy here. Codecademy teaches people how to start coding. Books and video aren’t good enough for most people looking to get started in coding, so Codecademy has built a simple, interactive way to get people coding. The app has been out for four days and already has over 250,000 users — and these are people that have actively completed an actual exercise. Most users spending more than 1 hour on the site. Eight simple lessons of JavaScript are available so far. You can find our full coverage of PicPlum here Picplum is a service that makes it easy to send print photos (as opposed to the digital kind) to your friends and loved ones on a regular basis, with very little effort required on your part. Sign up for the service, then email in your favorite photos as you take them — Picplum will handle the rest. The service starts at $7/month. This may sound a bit steep, but given how much hassle is involved with routinely choosing, then shipping photos, it may be well worth it.  You can find our coverage on Interstate’s launch here. Interstate’s goal is is to offer developers a tracking tool that hits the sweet spot between 37signals’s Basecamp — which they say is fairly basic — and PivotalTracker, which may be too complex for some purposes. The application includes the functionality you’d expect from a development roadmap app: you can the current status of each task (and subtask), plot out where things should be over the coming weeks, and attach supplementary files to each task. You can also publicly share a portion of your roadmap with the public if you’d lie. Latest headlines delivered to you daily MakerBot Industries, creator of home 3D printers, has announced a total of $10 million in funding from a number of investors, the bulk coming from Foundry Group. Also included in the round were Bezos Expeditions, True Ventures, and RRE, along with a dozen or so angel investors. The company started in 2009 with around $75,000 in seed money, and since then has put together and sold some 5200 of their compact fabrication machines. We saw them in action at the very first TechCrunch Disrupt NYC, and since then they’ve been a regular feature on this blog. MakerBot also just added Brad Feld to their board, and are now hiring. The hardware space is a difficult one to bootstrap in, but founder Bre Pettis thinks we’ll be seeing plenty of hardware startups over the next few years. While services and software tend to offer quicker scaling and consequently more immediate returns, there’s still a place for devices and accessories in the world, especially if they’re unique. MakerBot’s capabilities are impressive, but with competition from fabrication-by-mail services like Shapeways, the barrier for entry to their self-powered 3D printing world is still quite high. The home fabrication business is changing as well, and competitors (not to say imitators) will see the opportunity to iterate on MakerBot’s design and offer more speed, materials, and so on. That said, the ability to obtain a microwave-sized rapid prototyping machine for under a thousand dollars is one of these signs of the times we tend to unfairly play down. It’s absolutely amazing that this is possible in the first place, but the business realities may not allow it to grow at the rate the tech industry tends to find exciting. More details about the funding, as well as links to the various angels involved, can be found over at MakerBot’s blog. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in March, after at least one high profile security incident, Twitter created an option to turn on HTTPS at all times. But you could only enable the more secure way of viewing twitter.com by manually selecting it in your profile (or typing “https://” each time you went to Twitter). Starting today, the service is beginning to enable HTTPS by default. At first, this will only be enabled for a small group of users, Twitter says. Over time, they’ll roll it out to more. It’s a welcome change that other services like Gmail have added over the years. Google has even experimented with it for google.com, and Facebook has an option to use it as well after years of avoiding it. A lot services avoid using it because it does mean a slight performance hit. Others don’t like it because it scrubs referral data. And it can mean that certain third-party data can act funky. But in the age of Firesheep, HTTPS is becoming necessary. If you’re not in the on-by-default test group and want to learn more about HTTPS, you can do so here. Twitter recommends that everyone turns it on while they slowly roll it out to all. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The smart money is pouring into Moat, the ad tech startup founded by former Right Media CEO Mike Walrath and brothers Jonah and Noah Goodhart.  Ron Conway’s SV Angel led a $1.5 million round, along with Founders Fund, Vast Ventures, Lerer Ventures, Founder Collective, and First Round Capital.  Walrath and the Goodhart brothers previously seeded the company with $3 million from their funding vehicle, WGI Group. Moat is attempting to create new ways to measure the effectiveness of online display ads. Its first product is a display ad search engine that just searches display ads so that people in the industry can easily see what campaigns are running online for different brands. Today, Moat is also launching a new brand analytics product that measures attention based on mouse hovers and heatmaps.   Moat wants to replace the click as a valid measurement of an online ad’s effectiveness.  According to Jonah Goodhart, only 8% of internet users account for almost 85% of all display ad clicks.  As I wrote in a previous post about Moat: “Part of the problem with digital advertising,” says Walrath, “is that we think we know what is happening with an ad and what makes it successful. Right now, all you have are clicks and conversions.” Walrath thinks the industry is measuring the wrong things: impressions on one end, and clicks on the other. Big brand advertisers care more about attention.  Moat has a proxy for attention. It can generate a heat map of where people hover their mouse over an ad, and where they click as well. . . . Moat offers these heatmap analytics to brand advertisers, to help them figure out which display ads are the most engaging and to give them tools to fix the ones that are not working. The next step is to test different versions of the same ad to see which ones draw the most attention so that marketers can iterate faster and fine tune their messaging just like search marketers already do.  Moat plans to create a marketplace for ad designers to make it easier for brand advertisers to create multiple versions of ads and test them rigorously. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Our parent company AOL is having a rough time making money from Patch, its rapidly expanding network of local news sites, and that’s not its only problem. Today, group buying website BuyWithMe announced that it has recruited Charlie Gray, formerly Executive Vice President at Patch, as its new ‘Chief People Officer’. BuyWithMe, which rivals the likes of Groupon and LivingSocial in the United States, says Gray will help manage the company’s growth plans, and hire, train and retain talent throughout the country. BuyWithMe is certainly aggressive when it comes to acquiring its way into new markets. This year, it has already completed five acquisitions scooping up New York deals site Scoop St., Chicago deals siteDealADayOnline, San Francisco deals site Swoop, loyalty company Edhance, and LocalTwist.  BuyWithMe launched in 2009 and now operates in Austin, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle and Washington D.C. At Patch, Gray scaled the growth from 100 employees in 30 locations to 1,400 employees in more than 800 locations in just one year, so the hire showcases BuyWithMe’s ambition for further expansion.  Previously, Gray served as Head of HR and Staffing for Google’s North American Advertising Sales department, where he oversaw all people-related functions for Google’s US and Canada sales and operations teams. He’s also worked for Ziff-Davis and RecycleBank in the past. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Engine Yard, a provider of Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) solutions, this morning announced it has acquired Orchestra, developer of a platform for deploying, scaling and managing PHP applications. Engine Yard, which is backed by investors like Benchmark Capital, New Enterprise Associates, and Amazon.com, opted not to disclose the financial terms of the acquisition. The San Francisco-based company is best known for its PaaS for Ruby on Rails applications, but the acquisition will allow the company to add support for PHP applications. Engine Yard in a statement says will continue developing the Orchestra PHP platform and continue to invest in both Ruby on Rails and PHP open source communities and projects. There are no plans to discontinue support or development of any of Orchestra’s offerings. Orchestra is made by echolibre, an Irish company employing avid contributors to the PHP community, and creators of FRAPI, an Open Source API Framework (among other projects). The entire Orchestra team will be joining Engine Yard as a result of the acquisition. To date, Engine Yard has raised $37.5 million in funding. The company competes with another venture-backed startup, Heroku, which was acquired by Salesforce for $212 million in cash late last year), among others.Orchestra Announcement – 23rd August 2011 from Orchestra on Vimeo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily AliveCor, developer of a low-budget electrocardiogram (ECG) recorder that works in conjunction with a variety of mobile platforms (including iPhone, iPad, and Android devices), has raised $3 million in Series A funding, the company announced this morning. The financing round was led by Burrill & Company along with Qualcomm, acting through its venture investment arm, Qualcomm Ventures, and the Oklahoma Life Science Fund.  AliveCor’s credit card-sized wireless device is capable of turning iOS and Android smartphones and tablets into low-cost heart monitors that can be used by patients at home and by physicians and other healthcare providers in a clinical setting. See video below for a demo of the iPhone version. Note that the device isn’t for sale yet – AliveCor’s products haven’t yet been cleared as a medical device in the United States. It’s also unclear exactly how much it will cost, but earlier coverage by the Wall Street Journal mentioned a $100 price point. The company says it will now use the capital to complete clinical studies currently ongoing at the Oklahoma University Health Sciences Center, pursue those necessary regulatory approvals, and gear up for commercial launch of its electrocardiogram recorder. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Tawkon, an Israeli startup that offers mobile apps capable of measuring cellular radiation, has secured seed funding to the tune of $1.5 million. The capital injection comes from thetime, an investment company owned by Ilan Shiloah, chairman of McCann Erickson Israel and Nir Tarlovsky, and from Tzvika Barinboim. Other backers include management consulting company TASC, Don Perrin (one of Zipcar’s earliest investors) and Yossi Sandler, an early investor in Yedda (which was acquired by AOL). Tawkon’s offers mobile apps for Android phones, BlackBerry handsets and the iOS platform, although the iPhone app only runs on jailbroken devices. You see, Apple CEO Steve Jobs has made it abundantly clear that Tawkon‘s phone radiation measurement application is not welcome on its official App Store, pushing the startup to make it available for free (again, for jailbroken iPhones) through Cydia instead. Last March, Tawkon had sent an email to Jobs in the hopes of gaining approval for distribution of the application through Apple’s App Store, only to receive this response from the man, the legend: No interest. Sent from my iPhone Well, at least his disinterest hasn’t spooked investors too much. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Remember last year when it seemed like everyone was doing a location-based mobile app? One of the original players in that space, Brightkite, eventually got overshadowed by newer rivals. Now two of its founders are back with a new mobile startup, and once again they’re entering a space that is quickly getting crowded: food. Specifically, Brady Becker and Martin May have just launched Forkly into the App Store. While we’ve known about the company for almost a year, and known generally what they were doing for several months, it took quite a long time to get to this point. Now it’s here: an app for sharing and discovering food and drinks. If this sounds familiar it’s because you’ve heard of Foodspotting, the popular food picture app that now has a million downloads. Or maybe you’ve heard of Nosh, the new “Instagram of food” from a founder of Google Voice that launched recently. And those are just two competitors. There are many others, and trust me, many more coming in short order. But to its credit, Forkly looks very solid. Unlike Foodspotting, which focuses mainly on pictures, Forkly focuses more on ratings (Nosh focuses on both). You can “like” an item, “love” it, say it’s “okay”, or “not for me”. Forkly then uses this information to build up a “taste graph” for each user. This is then used to serve up other items you may like. Or you can see new items served up to you in a social feed. And you can easily flag something to note that you “want it”. And you can write short reviews, etc. There is also a gaming element in that users become “influencers” for recommending foods and drinks that others like. Forkly also smartly offers tools for food bloggers, restaurants, and brands to use the service right off the bat. These could end up being the key stand-out features in the space. You can read more about that in their post. So will Forkly be able to do what Brightkite could not — be the breakout of red-hot field? Considering that half of the competition hasn’t even launched yet, it’s way too early to tell. Being early didn’t help in the location space (in fact, you could argue that Dodgeball, which eventually led to the creation of Foursquare, was way too early), but it could here as startups race to get the most foods and ratings in their systems. You can find Forkly in the App Store here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Erply, a company that develops retail inventory management software, is taking on Square, Intuit and VeriFone today with a new mobile credit card reader for iOS devices. Erply’s credit card device connects to an iPad or iPhone and will transmit a customer’s encrypted credit card data to its own point of sale and inventory management software suite to process payments.  With the Erply’s reader, a retailer attaches the device to an iPad or iPhone’s charging port and this communicates with the company’s POS software to process the transaction and record the sale in inventory. The credit card information is actually encrypted inside the device, ensuring that the transaction is safe and secure.   The benefit for the reader to connection with inventory management is that it offers a comprehensive solution for retailers instead of having to user different software. And this works especially well in retail environments, where there are large amounts of inventory. Plus, founder Kristian Hiiemaa says that the reader is NFC enabled for mobile transactions.  Erply’s credit card reader is priced at $50 with a 1.9% transaction fee slightly less than Square, VeriFone and Intuit’s fees. Square recently dropped its $0.15 transaction fee, and charges merchants  a flat 2.75 percent fee. Intuit made a similar move. But Square’s reader and software is free, whereas Erply’s software ranges anywhere from $70 to $1000 per month. Erply can also leverage its existing user base of 20,000 retailers who use the company’s software for inventory management.  Of course, it’s important to note that Intuit’s GoPayment reader integrates with popular accounting software Quickbooks, and Square has also developed a more comprehensive point of sale system with its latest iPad app. And Square is growing particularly fast amongst small businesses.  Erply actually is a Seedcamp winner and has raised raised $2 million in funding from Redpoint and Index Ventures, Marten Mickos, Zack Urlocker (both formerly of MySQL), Kenny van Zant (SolarWinds), Aydin Senkut, David McClure and the Accelerator Group. Erply’s mobile credit card reader is available now for the iPad and will be available within three months for the iPhone.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Wanova, a turnkey desktop management cloud provider, has raised $10 million in series B funding from Greylock Partners, Carmel Ventures and Opus Capital. This brings the company’s total funding to $23 million.  Wanova provides Distributed Desktop Virtualization solutions that centralize control of the desktop infrastructure while optimizing the user experience and providing full support for offline use. Wanova’s flagship product Mirage, combines centralized PC image management with the ability to run images natively on a PC, allowing enterprise to reduce desktop Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) and improve IT operations.  With Mirage, PC images including personalization settings run locally on a PC allowing users to take advantage of PC native performance, including the ability to run multimedia applications and work while disconnected from the network.   Wanova actually just scored a big win in the IP world, announcing its first U.S. patent for its centralization technology that provides layered, single image management of PCs in the network, local execution of the image on the PC, and optimized synchronization between local and centralized images.  The new funding will be used towards building global sales and support teams and product development.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier today, new TechStars Network member, the Tampa Bay-based Gazelle Lab, announced its first full round of program participants. This 3-month, mentor-driven program based on the TechStars model is one of the first of its kind to emerge in the Tampa Bay region –  a region that’s been pushing to become a new home to technological and entrepreneurial innovation. This first group includes some unique companies, like a location-based mobile platform for sharing digital media, an app that connects to your car to diagnose those baffling “check engine” messages and an online ordering system for restaurants that puts big company technology into the hands of SMBs, just to name a few. We got a sneak peak at all 6 of the new companies today, and are now eagerly awaiting their launches later this fall. While a group of 6 is small compared with other accelerator programs’ outputs, for Tampa Bay, it’s a notable number. This under-the-radar geographic region, which was previously home to Wikipedia before its 2007 relocation to California as well as the recently acquired website builder Wufoo, isn’t really on the map of notable “tech hotspots.” But Gazelle Lab is hoping to change that with its new program for early stage startups. Below are today’s Gazelle Labs’ first participants, all of which are in various stages of development. The startups will launch this fall, when they present to potential investors at Gazelle Labs’ Demo Day event. AutoIQ AutoIQ is a combination gadget and HTML5-based mobile application that listens to your car in order to save you money. The company sells an off-the-shelf diagnostic gadget that connects to the onboard diagnostic (OBD) port of your vehicle. There are several different payment options for the service’s users. For $50, you receive the gadget and a year of service. You can also choose to buy your own gadget from a third-party and pay just $3/month for the service, or you can choose to pay $5/month for both the gadget and the service on a subscription basis. The OBD port is a standard port, accessible on all modern vehicles without having to get your hands dirty poking around under the hood. The gadget, which the company calls the “translator,” listens to the car’s computer and then “translates” those mysterious error messages into understandable language. Messages can come to you through push notifications, text messages, emails or via the AutoIQ online service. How bad is that “check engine” message, for example? Do you really need an air filter, as your mechanic says? In addition, AutoIQ not only makes it easier to understand what your car is trying to tell you, it will also help you find the best prices for servicing your vehicle in town. Repair shops will eventually be able to tap into the data AutoIQ generates and target offers to groups of customers. Pricing for that aspect of the service is still being worked out, however. The service will launch first in Tampa Bay and will then roll out to Southern California, followed by the rest of the U.S. CityQuest CityQuest is a new (in-development) mobile application that transforms normal metropolitan landscapes into adventure-filled mini-games that “promote local commerce and vanquish boredom.” While operating in the same general space as Foursquare and Gowalla, the app doesn’t see itself as competing directly with those “check in” based networks. Its goals are slightly different – promote local discovery, encourage users to “get out of the house” and explore their city, visit popular landmarks, discover new businesses and patronize those which are their favorites. Instead of checkins, the game will utilize “quests” – simple and fun tasks that enable users to earn badges and points and acquire gold. But unlike other apps that employ gamification techniques, CityQuest doesn’t want the rewards users earn to be meaningless. That’s why players can choose to donate gold they earn to local charities, community groups or schools in the form of actual cash. And regular users who acquire “experience points” will actually be able to help shape the game’s future development, suggesting businesses that should be included in future quests, for example. Of course, there may be a “deals” angle, too, where gold could lead to discounts at local stores, but that’s further down the road. The app will initially launch on one mobile platform this fall, and will then be ported to more platforms in the future. CityQuest also tied for first place at Tampa Bay’s Startup Weekend last month. Dropost.it Dropost.it, another mobile app that emerged from Tampa Bay’s first Startup Weekend, allows you to “drop” text messages and media in a geographical area for others to receive when they get there. That media can be music, video, photos, games, or any other digital file. The best way to understand Dropost.it is to think of it as sort of “location-based graffiti.” It’s not designed to be a niche experience, but rather a location-based platform for sharing media. There are several possible uses for this sort of technology, ranging from geo-fenced location-based reminders to in-store promotions where the app’s users receive discounts at local businesses. But the most intriguing thing about this app is how it attaches a real-world location to the online, virtual world. Using Dropost.it, you could see a video of an interesting event that happened at particular spot. Or maybe you discover a simple game to play while waiting in the long line at the bank. Or you arrive at the grocery store, and get a message from your roommate to pick up some milk. Messages posted to Dropost.it can be set to public or private, as desired. It will also integrate with social networks, like Twitter, Facebook and Google+, to enable friend discovery. Dropost.it will be available on iOS, Android and Windows Phone when it launches later this fall. Leads Direct, Inc. Leads Direct, LLC is an online lead aggregator and cost-per-lead provider for multiple service-based verticals. That description is being kept fairly high-level because the company’s founders are still at their day jobs. This company is taking a different approach from the other startups in Gazelle Lab in that it isn’t disruptive in terms of the core service being offered, but in the way that the service works. Lead generation is a business that’s been around for some time, and has a sound business model, the founders explain, but the company plans on making some changes to address specific needs in each vertical they target. The company will initially target property management and real estate, where it will provide advertisers with more control over budgets, a better understaning of where ad dollars are being spent and itemized billing – all things its competitors currently lack. In short, Leads Directo will offer a Google AdWords-like toolset for acquiring leads. Red Hawk Interactive, Inc. Red Hawk Interactive plans to integrate restaurant listings and menu ordering systems into streaming video services. While it can’t discuss specifics, the company says it’s in talks with a well-known streaming video brand. And it’s currently reaching out to others in the same market. To give you an idea of the clients RedHawk has in mind, streaming video services like Netflix, Hulu, or Boxee are the types of targets the company is interested in talking with. RedHawk would provide a way for these service to display links to restaurants via the screen that loads before you start the movie. For example, under the movie’s description, would be a simple option that read something like “Order Food.” Clicking the link would take you to a list of participating restaurants with online ordering systems. The way this interface would look and operate is up to the streaming video provider, as this would be a white label product only. However, RedHawk’s goal is not to function as an ad platform. That means local restaurants are not buying the links, or paying for a higher position. Instead RedHawk pulls from menu providers’ lists, and filters those by zip code in order to suggest the available restaurants to end users, along with delivery times and delivery areas. The customer would then be walked through a simplified online ordering system. RedHawk isn’t the final product name for the service, which has been in development since April. Teburu Teburu (Japanese for “table”) provides a web-based and mobile platform for restaurants to easily manage their online and mobile ordering services. For small to medium-sized restaurants, it’s still a challenge to get the information from the ordering system to the kitchen, says Teburu. Typical third-party systems often forgo expensive point-of-sale (POS) integration and instead phone the restaurant, fax in orders or send orders via email. Teburu makes POS integration a more affordable option, or restaurants can opt for the company’s specially designed HTML5 tablet application which runs on locked-down mobile hardware and software, like a customized version of Android, for example. The app will alert order takers to incoming orders via flashes or beeps. Then staff simply inputs the order in their own system. The overall goal is to provide SMBs with the same level of control over their menus and online ordering presence as larger companies have. The product will be white-labeled so restaurants can control own branding. A mobile app framework is also in development which would allow restaurants to take orders via a branded mobile application. Teburu already has a large chain testing the service right now, but will open up to others later this year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last November, location startup SimpleGeo brought in former Digg CEO Jay Adelson to replace co-founder Matt Galligan as CEO. At the time, Galligan slid into the role of Chief Strategy Officer and became more of a public face for the company. Now he’s leaving the company entirely. You can read the news on SimpleGeo’s blog here, as well as Galligan’s own thoughts here. But essentially this is something that has been in the works ever since Adelson took over those many months ago, Galligan tells us. With the company now transitioning into their next phase, Galligan felt the time was right to fully step aside. He’ll continue to serve as an advisor, but Adelson and SimpleGeo co-founder Joe Stump will continue to steer the ship. While Galligan figures out what he wants to do next, he’s going to take an extended period of time off. He dove right into SimpleGeo (then known as Crash Corp.) after leaving AOL in May 2009. He sold his first startup, Socialthing, to AOL in August 2008. But Galligan isn’t fully taking a step back from the startup scene during his time off. He’ll be helping out TechStars, giving the incubator a much-needed voice and presence on the west coast. Galligan has long had ties to the TechStars community, as Socialthing was in the inaugural class in 2007. Additionally, he’ll soon be launching a non-profit foundation with Shervin Pishevar, a longtime entrepreneur and now a managing director at Menlo Ventures. Called “1% of Nothing“, the foundation will ask founders to commit a one percent stake in their company to be given to charity in the case of a liquidity event. Galligan did this himself, giving one percent of the sale of Socialthing to Community Foundation in Boulder, Colorado. SimpleGeo has raised around $10 million in funding so far. As they enter this next phase, whispers have them out there raising more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily iSwifter, an iPad app that allows developers to stream flash games to the tablet device, is announcing that revenue for 2011 will past $10 million. That’s impressive considering the company is only a year old. As we’ve written in the past, iSwifter allows users to browse, play and rate Flash games from gaming portals (like Facebook) on the web, with each game optimized for iPad. The startup actually spun out of incubator YouWeb last year. With iSwifter, Flash does not run on the device at all but it is streamed to the tablet just like a Netflix movie or a YouTube video. The company makes money off of a subscription-model for monthly gaming, in which users pay $4.99 for unlimited access to Flash social games on Facebook and MMOs. And the company recently revealed that 500,000 people are playing nearly 2,000 Facebook games using iSwifter.   In fact, iSwifter has found that many users (20 percent) are willing to pay for otherwise free games if they can be played on the iPad. Hundreds of thousands of iSwifter users have spent millions of minutes on Facebook with nearly half making In-App Purchases.  iSwifter is also staffing up on engineering talent. Ajit Mayya, former Sr. Director of Engineering at VMware; Lucian Masalar, an architect from eBay, and Pankaj Kumar, previously at Microsoft; are all joining the firm’s development team.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Placecast’s ShopAlerts service, which delivers retailer and merchant offers and discounts to consumers via their mobile phones, is announcing new functionality today—integration with mobile smartphone apps.  As we’ve written in the past, ShopAlerts is a white-label geofencing platform for businesses that want to deliver geo-triggered offers to their customers on their mobile phones. Consumers can opt-in to receiving text messages in a variety of ways—at the store, online, via text-message, mobile websites or on Facebook. Geofences are virtual areas set around physical locations; when an opted-in consumer is inside a geofenced area, she receives a message from a business, including a discount, notice of a sale, directions to a store or other content. With the new feature, retailers deploying mobile apps can allow consumers to receive a location-based message from the retailer’s nearest store or other relevant location, without the app being open Just as ShopAlerts programs work on any phone, this new feature works on any smartphone platform. After a retailer integrates with ShopAlerts, customers (who are opted into receiving alerts) will receive location-based push notifications when they are in a geofenced area. Retailers can also leverage preferences expressed by the consumer, such as loyalty or past purchase data to increase the relevance of the message or deal. Time of day and weather can also be taken into account to create added relevance, and brands could also enable a location-based notification when a specific product is available at a nearby store.  Placecast says that it will work directly with retailers to integrate ShopAlerts into their apps, helping them to design a program and create a messaging strategy, select the number and size of geofences and activate locations.  The integration with retailer smartphone apps makes a lot of sense for Placecast. With the growth in online to offline commerce, Placecast is giving retailers another way to target consumers and offer relevant deals and information. The goal is to bring the consumer into the store, and messages sent via a smartphone app can help accomplish this.  Placecast is already being used by a number of high profile brands such as The North Face, and even AT&T.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Many businesses embed YouTube videos on their sites, but one of the pain points of using YouTube as a platform is that visitors can click through the video to YouTube and off the brand’s site — and those videos also include YouTube’s ads and branding. Ooyala and Brightcove both offer professional, enterprise-hosted video platforms but these can be expensive. Enter Y Combinator-backed Vidyard, which is launching today as an affordable way for businesses to host videos that can be viewed either on a landing page or via an embeddable player. Basically, Vidyard is offering a service that’s very similar to YouTube, but without that link to a third-party portal. The startup also offers instant, detailed and real-time analytics with regards to the embedded video performance. Co-founder Michael Litt says that currently 3.5 million businesses host YouTube videos on their site and there’s a huge opportunity to offer a better, simpler, easy to use video hosting product to companies. Here’s how Vidyard works. First, you can choose to upload a video file or a video from YouTube. You can then add a custom thumbnail, choose from 10 different player skins, customize the size and color, enable viral sharing on Twitter and Facebook, and default content to HD if you’d like. In terms of integrating the video into a site, Vidyard offers a simple code that can be embedded on any site (users can choose to have an in-line video or one that appears as a pop-up). Or businesses can choose to send people to a landing page with a link to the video, which Litt says is ideal for email marketing. Users can also comment on these pages via Twitter and Facebook. Once a business uses Vidyard, it can also access detailed analytics on the performance of the video. The startup allows businesses to see how many people watched a video, their attention span, minutes watched, most popular times within a video, where people are located geographically, and more. To monetize, Vidyard is using a freemium model: startups and companies with a smaller marketing budget can create a hosted video through Vidyard for free with some of the functionality above (including analytics). For $20 to $50 a month, they can add branded players, realtime analytics, and other premium features. And Vidyard also has plans for large-scale video hosting. The startup uses RTMP streaming, which means you can jump to the middle of a video without waiting for the buffer to catch up. You can also implement chaptering, which means you can overlay links to additional videos on top of the one being watched. Every plan includes 101 GB of bandwidth, and Litt says no business goes over this amount. The startup has tweaked its hosting technology to be bandwidth efficient, and only buffers ten second in advance so the business isn’t wasting bandwidth on clients that aren’t watching the whole videos. Vidyard hasn’t yet graduated from Y Combinator’s incubator (that happens this week) but has already caught the eye of some well known companies and investors. Ernst and Young, Adchemy, and TheBizMedia (a digital video agency that represents Coke and Maxwell House) are using Vidyard’s hosting platform. And in addition to the Start Fund and Y Combinator’s financial backing, Vidyard has raised additional funds from former RIM COO Dennis Kavelman and SV Angel.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKno 3D App DemoHow do you make a digital textbook more than just a glorified PDF on a tablet?  Kno, the tablet textbook company started by Chegg co-founder Osman Rashid, is rolling out a variety of features to try to bring textbooks to life, including Facebook integration, automated quizes, an activity stream of notes.  But an update to its iPad app today points to how digital textbooks can create entirely new experiences out of static notations. In the vido above, Rashid shows me Kno’s 3D modeling feature. The 3D feature right now works only with models of molecules in chemistry textbooks.  It converts the standard chemistry notations indicating how atoms are bonded together in a molecule into a spinning 3D model along the margins.  These 3D models can be enlarged and rotated to give students a better visualization of how each one appears. Of all the new features Rashid showed me, this one impressed me the most because Kno is taking the original text and making it a richer experience on the iPad.  You can’t do this on paper.  And you can imagine 3D models appearing for other types of 2D content such as blueprints, engineering diagrams, or other types of illustrations.   Kno is introducing a couple of other features today as well, video notes and smart links.  Kno textbooks include a “journal,” which s a stream of your highlights, notes, audio notes, and photos.  Now you can add video clips recorded directly from the iPad camera as well.  The smart links also bring in more video into each textbook, but in context with what you are reading.  These initially will be Khan Academy videos, but will include other educational videos online in the future.  Below is a video of the QuizMe and Journal features, introduced earlier this month. Latest headlines delivered to you daily 6fusion, a provider of cloud infrastructure management software and services, this morning announced that it has raised $7 million in a Series B round of funding led by Grotech Ventures.  Previous backer Intersouth Partners also participated in the round. The company provides an end-to-end cloud management platform that enables global workload distribution by turning companies’ public and private clouds into pay-per-use billable utilities.  6fusion has developed a metering algorithm, dubbed the Workload Allocation Cube, which it says standardizes the quantification of supply and demand for compute resources. The company’s UC6 Cloud Management Platform federates private data center and third party cloud operators, providing a single console to allow IT organizations to meter, manage and optimize hybrid cloud infrastructures. Lawson DeVries of Grotech Ventures will join 6fusion’s board.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Hopper, a Montreal, Canada-based startup, has raised $8 million in fresh funding from Atlas Venture and previous backer Brightspark Ventures to try and ‘reinvent travel search’. Hopper is still in stealth mode, but if you’d like to learn more about what they’re cooking, check out this Boston.com profile or this article from Xconomy Boston. Indeed, Hopper plans to open a new office in Boston, where it expects to double its engineering team over the next year.  The company is essentially building a ‘travel discovery’ engine for consumers, enabling people to discover destinations and products using only keywords such as “best beaches in Europe”. The startup was conceived by Chief Engineer Sebastien Rainville, CEO Frederic Lalonde and Chief of Product Joost Ouwerkerk. The latter two came from Expedia, which acquired Lalonde’s previous company, Newtrade Technologies, back in 2002. Hopper was originally founded in 2007 and previously raised $2 million in 2008, bringing the company’s total funding to $10 million today. Jeff Fagnan, partner at Atlas Venture, will join the Hopper board of directors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Leveraging the success of Rent The Runway’s model, Luxemi is launching as an e-commerce site where customers can both borrow or buy Indian apparel and accessories. The site is targeted at a niche audience of South Asian American women who don’t want to spend the money on an expensive Indian outfit, or that don’t live near a shop that sells traditional Indian wear.  Instead of just offering apparel and accessories for sale, Luxemi maintains two completely separate collections: one consisting of apparel and accessories for sale and the other a “borrow closet” consisting of apparel and accessories available for rental. When borrowing, shoppers will select their reservation date, rental period (4 or 10 days) and their size. The site’s rental price point starts at $78 for traditional Sarees and Salwars and $28 for jewelry (includes a backup size saree blouse to ensure fit, the Luxe Pack for the clothing including pins, Bindis and a garment bag to keep, and free return shipping). Luxemi, which has been open for only a month, has signed up 4200 memberships, and so far the average order size is over $250.  While this is sure to be a hit amongst Indian-American women, it’s questionable whether Luxemi will be able to create a market outside of this ethnic demographic. But the startup says that they have seen a strong interest outside the South Asian community with 40 percent of orders placed by non-Indian customers.  And Luxemi isn’t the first retail site to cater to the Indian-American shopping community. Exclusively.in is another e-commerce site that caters to the Indian diaspora, but with a flash sales model. The company just raised $16 million from Tiger Global, and is growing fast for a niche e-commerce site.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week, daily deals giant Groupon registered a bunch of domain names with ‘groupongoods’ in them (.com, .net, .us, .info, .biz and interestingly, .fr). Evidently, securing those domain names doesn’t necessarily mean the company is going to debut a service by the name ‘Groupon Goods’ soon or even in the distant future, but let’s hypothesize for a moment that this is exactly what they’re planning to do. Imagine if Groupon starts instructing its vast sales forces, which are located all around the world, to start focusing on opportunities other than restaurants, spas, massages and pilates classes.  Better yet: what if they end up seeking mutually beneficial partnerships with companies like Alice.com, Drugstore.com, Pets.com, Overstock.com or Newegg.com in order to branch out into selling discounted groceries, households items, consumer electronics and whatnot. Theoretically, the fast-growing company could apply its successful ‘local commerce’ model and leverage its enormous international subscriber base (circa 120 million subscribers and counting) to venture into offering deals for groceries, household items and other goods regularly purchased online. Actually, it would make perfect sense in my mind.  For one, it would be a way for Groupon to diversify its revenue streams and accelerate sales growth as the company prepares to go public, without necessarily adding a lot of overhead costs (especially if they go for partnerships rather than building such a service in-house). Notably, it wouldn’t be the first time Groupon makes such a move. They’ve already partnered with juggernauts Expedia and Livenation to offer online deals on travel (Groupon Getaways) and event tickets (GrouponLive), respectively. We’ve contacted Groupon – perhaps they’re cool enough to not decline to comment on rumors or speculation. Hope springs eternal, etcetera. A ‘Groupon Goods’ done right could potentially be a challenger to Amazon, which is not only known for its Amazon.com ecommerce business but also for its grocery shopping site Amazon Fresh and (acquired) niche online stores such as Diapers.com, Soap.com, Wag.com and Zappos.com.  Amazon also owns Woot, which offers daily deals on a range of items (mostly consumer electronics). On a sidenote: this wouldn’t constitute a one-sided attack. After all, Amazon is after Groupon’s bread and butter too, with a quiet roll-out of AmazonLocal currently underway in the United States. Groupon recently announced that it took a net loss of $102.7 million in the second quarter of 2011 on $878 million of revenue (and lost roughly $205 million in the first half of the year). Groupon currently employs some 10,000 people all over the globe. So, Groupon, any cats on hand to fuel or debunk the above Groupon Goods rumors? Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKevin O’Connor on What Makes a Good EntrepreneurChris Dixon begins this episode of Founder Stories with DoubleClick and FindTheBest Co-founder Kevin O’Conner by telling O’Connor that “DoubleClick is probably the closest thing New York has to a PayPal.” Meaning the two companies share an aptitude for hiring employees that go on to start innovative businesses.  Just as Paypal spawned Yelp, YouTube, and LinkedIn, DoubleClick spawned dozens of startups in New York City like Right Media. With this in mind, Dixon asks O’Connor if he intentionally created an environment that encouraged innovation while at DoubleClick, before going on to ask O’Connor what he considers to be the defining characteristics of successful entrepreneurs. O’Connor describes his systemized way of spurring innovation.  He lists a few signs of a successful entrepreneur.  A desire for control and the ability to challenge authority are near top of the list. A way to detect the second trait? “Have you told your boss to shove it?” In the video below, O’Connor discusses his genesis of his latest startup, FindTheBest, a service that offers side-by-side comparisons of everything from cigars to business schools. At the intersection of trying to solve a “big obvious” idea and not finding a site that served his needs, O’Connor began to build what would become the company.  He describes it as a “decision engine” to help you make complicated decisions where search falls flat.  What dog should I buy? Where should I send my kid to summer camp?  What investment adviser should I hire? Make sure to watch both videos for additional insights along with the first two installments of this interview (Part I and Part II), as well as past episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Zlio, a site which lets users create online shops where they sell goods from other e-commerce services, is joining the deadpool. The 6-year old outlet is going out of business, and will officially closing its doors on September 11th. The company blames Google’s algorithms for its demise, surprisingly, not Zlio’s concept or business model. In an email to users to inform them of the service’s impending shutdown, fingers were pointed all around, not only at Google, but also at an undisclosed SEO company who failed to improve the site’s rankings in Google’s search results. Oddly, Amazon’s aStore service, which lets Amazon’s Associates build their own webstores, was not mentioned as contributing to the the service’s downturn. Neither was Amazon’s more professional Web Storefront product. Or the dozens of DIY online shops filled with user-created content, like Cafepress, Zazzle or Spreadshirt, for example. Oh no, it’s all Google’s fault. The full email is below. Six years after its launch, we regret to announce that we are going out of business. The service will officially end on September 11! Zlio had a fantastic start, receiving capital from one Europe’s largest venture capital funds, Mangrove Capital. In addition, we held advanced M&amp;amp;A talks with Google, which unfortunately fell through at the last minute. Our strong initial growth was interrupted on September 27, 2007, when the majority of Zlio shops, which were generally very well ranked, saw their Google ranking drop dramatically, eliminating 65% of our traffic. Despite our best efforts, and the opening of 380,000 stores to date, it has not been possible to regain our previous Google rankings, except in exceptional cases. When we founded Zlio, we thought that you, members of Zlio, would successfully promote your shops among your circles. We did not believe that Google referencing would be so crucial. Unfortunately, it has proved to be indispensable. Among the actions taken to improve our Google ranking, we approached an SEO company who claimed they were able to fix our problem. In view of their poor performance, we assessed that this company had not fulfilled its obligations. Therefore, we entered into dispute with it, which resulted in a court case whose sentence was rendered on July 26, 2011. This ruling is available on the website of the Paris Commercial Court (Tribunal de Commerce de Paris). This decision sentences us both to pay the whole of a service that we still believe have not been provided and to pay damages for publishing our opinion about Referencement on Twitter. The latter part of the sentence has already drawn much attention in the French media. This sentence means we cannot go on. The service has been losing money for several years (which forced us to gradually reduce our staff), and the amounts to which we are sentenced to pay today no longer allow us to meet our obligations. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInDoubleClick’s Kevin O’Connor on NetscapeWhen Kevin O’Connor started DoubleClick in the mid-1990s, it was half an online media sales company for early Web companies like Netscape and Excite and half a technology company.  “We were their profits,” O’Connor tells Chris Dixon about Netscape in this second installment of his Founder Stories interview.  (Watch the first one here).   O’Connor relates how he got DoubleClick going in the early days, why he picked New York over Silicon Valley, and the challenges of introducing measurable advertising just when the Web was starting to take off.  “People didn’t want accountability,” he says.  Even the technology companies who were customers only wanted to use DoubleClick as their media reps, and not for their technology.  When their contract with Netscape came up for renewal, DoubleClick was going to be fired as Netscape’s rep firm because Netscape did not believe in their technology or that that they could sell advertising to CIOs (bundled with servers, which is what Netscape wanted to do).  “Have you ever met a CIO that buys advertising?  It was so nonsensical.” The tension between being an advertising network and a technology company continued, but the bet on technology proved to be the correct one.  In a previous Founder Stories, former DoubelClick CEO Kevin Ryan relates how during the bust, DoubleClick would lose 70 percent of its clients before coming out on the other side. In the video below, O’Connor recalls how DoubleClick got through the crash.  Fortunately, DoubleClick had just raised $700 million.  “So that money saved you,” notes Dixon. He then asks O-Connor what made DoubleClick successful.  There is “always that element of luck,” concedes O’Connor, but the two keys to success in his mind for any tech company are to “provide the best technological solution to a big problem and hire smart athletes” (by which he means smart people who are hyper-competitive).   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Startup GoodData, which provides companies with a cloud-based business intelligence (BI) platform, has raised $15 million in funding led by Andreessen Horowitz with existing investors General Catalyst Partners, Fidelity Growth Partners and Windcrest Partners also contributing to the round. This investment brings GoodData’s total funding to $28.5 million. The company has also added two new members to the Board of Directors: John O’Farrell, General Partner at Andreessen Horowitz, and Dave Girouard, President of Google Enterprise. Additionally, this marks Andreessen Horowitz’s fourth investment in GoodData (including two seed investments, and 2010 round). Founded by serial entrepreneur Roman Stanek, GoodData offers a cloud-based data analytics solution that is more cost-effective than similar products offered by IBM, SAP and Oracle. Basically, companies can plug GoodData’s products into their own cloud-based SaaS products (i.e. Salesforce, Zendesk) and then can access operational dashboards, advanced reporting and data warehousing. Beyond just structuring data, GoodData also gives companies the best practices and actionable insights based on data, adding a layer of intelligence. The company has a number of analytics apps for SaaS products, including Zendesk, Twilio, Pardot, and Get Satisfaction, which offers these companies’ customers additional insight into data. Currently the company offers 20 applications, and will be expanding to more SaaS platforms with the new funding. The company expects to add another 30 apps by the end of the year.   Stanek tells us that GoodData is disrupting the $25 billion BI and data warehousing space because previously data intelligence used to be a complicated process. But as more companies are relying on cloud applications for business functions such as sales, customer service and more, accessing and making sense of this enormous amount of cloud-based data has become a simplified process that takes minutes, he explains.  And GoodData’s offerings are seeing traction in the enterprise space. Over 2,500 companies, including Software AG, Time Warner Cable, Capgemini and Pandora Media, rely on GoodData’s data intelligence products. The company has seen 500% growth in overall platform usage in 2011 alone and is currently managing over 6,500 unique customer data mark. And more than 2 million reports were executed on the GoodData cloud BI platform in July of this year. Adding Google’s enterprise chief, Girouard, to the board is a pretty significant vote of confidence for the startup. Girouard who will advise the company on product development, service delivery and sales of cloud services, says of the GoodData: “GoodData has an amazing opportunity to build a huge business. Cloud computing and analytics is a killer combination, and GoodData has taken a unique and promising approach to leading in this market.”  Andreessen Horowitz’s O’Farrell is also bullish on GoodData, tells us that that he sees the startup becoming a billion dollar company. He explains that because the mass market still has to move to the cloud, there is still so much more potential for cloud-based businesses like GoodData, which extract valuable information from cloud data. “That’s something businesses will spend a lot of money on,” says O’Farrell.  O’Farrell also made an interesting point about the business intelligence space, in general. He says there isn’t a low barrier of entry to the space, but GoodData goes beyond just providing graphs and simple data visualization tools to offering a powerful platform that actually gives companies actionable insight from all of their business data. This, he says, creates a high barrier to entry, and will help GoodData succeed.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Drchrono, a startup that simplifies the professional lives of doctors by bringing electronic health records and much more to the iPad, has raised another $650,000 in seed funding from DST founder Yuri Milner and General Catalyst. In July, the company raised $675,000 in seed funding from General Catalyst, Charles River Ventures, 500 Startups, Gmail creator and FriendFeed cofounder Paul Buchheit, Google’s Principal Engineer Matt Cutts, and the Start Fund. As we’ve written in the past, drchrono’s iPad app allows doctors to schedule patient appointments, dictate notes via audio, take pictures, write prescriptions and send them to pharmacies, enable reminders, take clinical notes, access lab results, and, most importantly input electronic health records. Now, drchrono is looking to disrupt another part of the medical office experience by providing a new iPad app, called OnPatient, which replaces the patient check-in process. So, as soon as you enter a medical office, you are generally given a clipboard with a number of forms to fill out in the waiting room, including general information, medical history, confidentiality agreements and more. Now doctors’ offices can give users Drchrono’s free iPad app instead of a clipboard. On-Patient allows patients to complete family medical history, demographic information, and insurance information; take a profile photo and sign the HIPAA consent form with a digital signature. With the app, you can only fill out your form and are locked into this interface so patients won’t be able to switch to other apps or access other patients’ information.  And to make doctors’ lives easier, the app integrates with drchrono’s medical records interface, so medical personell don’t have to type in all the patient information. On subsequent visits, patients do not have to complete duplicate forms—they need only review their information and make any necessary changes on the iPad.  This is just another way in which drchrono is making the lives of doctors and their employees easier. As you may have heard, the Obama administration is currently offering incentives for doctors to start moving their health records online. drchrono was approved to qualify doctors for receiving $44,000 in incentives when they use the software as an electronic medical records platform. In fact, drchrono is the first native EHR on the iPad to be certified for Meaningful Use under the incentive.  Michael Nusimow, co-founder and CEO of drchrono, tells us that the company has also sweetened the deal for many doctors and is now waiving the set-up fees for its EHR platform (drchrono operates a freemium model). And he reiterated the company’s goal: for every doctor in the country to be using drchrono for medical records and data input.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Birchbox, a startup that serves as a makeup discovery retail platform, has raised $10.5 million in Series A round of funding, led by Accel Partners with First Round Capital, Harrison Metal, Forerunner Ventures, Lerer Ventures, Sam Lessin, Consigliere, Gary Vaynerchuck, Dave Morin, Stanford University Endowment and Andy Dunn participating in the round. Similar to Foodzie, Blissmobox, BeachMint and Babbaco; Birchbox has adopted a subscription, box of the month model where members receive curated makeup and beauty products. Each month, users receive at least four premium samples of cosmetics, shipped to their homes from over 80 high end beauty retailers like Kiehl’s, Laura Mercier, Smashbox, Nars and Cargo. The website supplements these monthly packages by providing pertinent tips and tutorials on its website for the featured samples. If a user wants to purchase the full-size version, they can buy it on Birchbox, which will earn them points for future discounts (inviting new members will also help you rack up points). The idea is help consumers discover new brands and products at an affordable price, while also driving sales. One of the unique aspects of Birchbox is that it offers a personalized suite of products each month that are customized to users’ preferences and profiles. Each users fills out a beauty survey, and creates a profile, which is then used to curate picks for each individual customer. Birchbox, which was founded by Harvard Business School grads Hayley Barna and Katia Beauchamp, launched nearly a year ago and already has a subscriber base of 45,000 customers as of June (all of whom are paying up to $10 per month for a box or $110 for a year). And subscribers are up 50 percent month-over-month for the past eleven months.   Accel partner Theresia Gouw Ranzetta says of the startup, “The team has forged partnerships with some of the world’s leading cosmetic brands to give consumers a fun, monthly beauty sampling experience. We believe Birchbox has many opportunities for continued growth, and we look forward to aiding their success.” Beauchamp tells us that the site aims to be a mix of both niche and more well-known products. In the end, she explains that Birchbox is trying to make the cosmetics shopping process easier for women and help brands get products in the hands of consumers. Beauchamp says the new funding will be used for further product development and for hiring. And the company is considering expanding to other verticals. While many retailers seemed to have jumped on the ‘box of the month’ bandwagon, the cosmetics industry is especially suited for the sampling experience. And Birchbox was one of the early adopters of the box of the month model. Many women (including myself) want to try beauty products (regardless of the price), whether it be makeup, shampoo, lotions, or face cream; first before investing in them. Birchbox not only accomplishes this, but also helps women discover new products and adds an editorial element. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Digital loyalty startup Chatterfly today launched its new rewards program for businesses and consumers in the form of a smartphone application for iPhone and Android. Like similar startups, including the now Google-owned Punchd, Chatterfly aims to replace the paper loyalty card with a more modern, digital version. But Chatterfly isn’t only focused on making businesses’ punchcards mobile. It’s a complete loyalty system that offers business owners the opportunity to engage their customers in other ways, including through social media sites, via QR codes, in-store promotions and more. As with any traditional loyalty program, businesses on Chatterfly can reward customers for making purchases in the store, but they can also reward them for sharing their experiences on social sties like Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare and Google+. With Chatterfly, customers earn points, which is a different model than the typical “buy 10 get 1 free” model that’s popular today. These points can either be redeemed at the local business or for Chatterfly’s own rewards – the choice is up to the consumer. And because it works as a mobile application, Chatterfly can take advantage of the smartphone’s camera to scan special QR codes tied to promotions. For example, the company suggests that a store could host an in-store scavenger hunt to entice new customers to drop by. Or, if the business wanted to do something simpler, it could just offer points to those who scan a QR code in the shop. On its own, the idea of rewarding loyalty customers is a good one, but the app itself needs quite a bit of polish, we think. Black-and-white pictures? Uneven layout? Yikes.  Of course, there’s still the challenge of convincing business owners to actually use the service, too. But Chatterfly is a little bit ahead there. Prior to launching, the company ran beta tests in the San Francisco Bay area with over 100 businesses, and said it received many positive responses. The company itself is based in San Mateo, where it was founded in June 2010 by Charles Michael Yim, formerly in business development at Fortify Software. It is privately funded. Chatterfly says the iPhone and Android versions of the app are available now and more platforms are coming soon.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily MileWise is a new search engine designed for frequent fliers that helps you find flights you can pay for using cash, airline miles or hotel and credit card points. The startup lets users track their air miles and rewards programs points in one single interface, then leverages that information to suggest which flights offer the most value. Unlike on other flight search engines where flights can be ranked by price, number of connections, airlines, or like on Hipmunk, by “agony” (a combination of factors), MileWise also takes in consideration your rewards earned when ranking its results.  The flight data comes from  Orbitz, Everbread and directly from the airlines at present. And MileWise may include data from “another major flight inventory provider” in the future.  When viewing your search results, the points, miles and cash options are shown using different colors, while the number in the bubble on the left help to rank the flights based on mile- or point–to-dollar value.  Similar flight options are collapsed by default, but clicking the link on the right beneath a search result will expand them. You can also filter flights by payment method, airline, card, number of stops and flight times. Currently, the service supports over 300 rewards programs. But it doesn’t just dumbly collect your data. MileWise tracks your rewards in order to warn you if they’re about to expire, points you to great deals you may have overlooked and keeps you from being surprised by large airline fees that sometimes accompany awards. It will also help you to earn more rewards by calculating the number of miles a flight will earn, including bonuses from status and cabin. Funding and Future Plans The MileWise team includes co-founder Vinay Pulim, who previously started Isovia (acquired by Motorola) and Reble.fm (acquired by Playlist.com) and who was Chris Dixon’s first engineering hire at Hunch. There’s also co-founder Sanjay Kothari, from Boston Consulting Group and co-founder Nick Meyer, formerly a co-founder at Reble.fm. Seye Ojumu is a more recent hire, and travel veteran Frederic Deschamps from Northwest Airlines advises. The startup has $1.5 million in venture capital from Atlas Ventures, Founder Collective, General Catalyst, High Line Venture Partners and iNovia Capital, as well as angel investment from Nivi Babak, David Cohen, Geoff Judge, Mitch Kapor, David Kidder, Josh Kushner, Alex Lloyd, Tom McInerney, Jacob Pechenik, Keith Rabois, Naval Ravikant, David Tisch and Kal Vepuri. It plans to raise another round in 7 to 8 months. MileWise has several potential revenue models under consideration, with a commissions model being considered of the near future. Later on, it will be able to make smart recommendations based on user behavior, like suggesting a user sign up for a credit card for a particular flight in order to gain the points needed to book it. Further down the line, the company may be able to turn its data into insights for partners. But the founders are careful to state that user privacy protected in all cases, and data will be anonymized. MileWise is also considering offering premium services, but nothing has been decided yet. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Atlanta-based startup Kabbage, which provides working capital to online merchants, has raised $17 million in Series B funding led by Mohr Davidow Ventures with BlueRun Ventures, David Bonderman, founder of TPG Capital; Warren Stephens, CEO of Stephens; the UPS Strategic Enterprise Fund, Jim McKelvey, co-founder of Square; and others participating in the round. This brings Kabbage’s total funding to $24 million.  Kabbage, which was founded by Marc Gorlin, Rob Frohwein and Kathryn Petralia, is essentially a way for online merchants and sellers on marketplaces like eBay and Amaxon to get capital they otherwise wouldn’t qualify for at a bank. Kabbage uses technology to analyze online merchants’ sales and credit history; customer traffic and reviews; and prices and inventory compared to competitors. And merchants can proactively add information to their Kabbage account to immediately increase their access to capital.  Via PayPal’s Adaptive Payments API, Kabbage will make cash advances available to eBay and other online marketplace sellers fairly quickly (Kabbage says that many transactions take as little has ten minutes). Gorlin tells me that many small businesses and online merchants can’t receive financing from traditional banks, and Kabbage is aiming to disrupt this space by providing a painless way to help these sellers access cash.  Kabbage makes money off of fees charged to merchants for the working capital. Fees depend on how long the online merchant keeps the capital (6 month maximum) and the customer’s repayment risk. Rates range from 6 percent to 16 percent of the original advance amount. Kabbage currently supports merchants operating on eBay, Amazon and Yahoo’s platform and plans to add support for sellers on Facebook, Etsy, Shopify, and Sears. Currently, there are ‘thousands’ of merchants using Kabbage and Gorlin expects for the total merchandise volume of Kabbage sellers to reach $3 billion in the next year.  In conjunction with the funding, Kabbage is also announcing that it has been granted U.S. Patent No. 7,983,951 entitled “Apparatus to provide liquid funds in the online auction and marketplace environment.” It basically covers a system by which a provider of capital utilizes informationregarding a merchant’s sales history on an e-commerce website to make a determination about providing funds. For a company which only launched a few years ago, snagging a patent is impressive.  Gorlin says the new funding will be used to add additional marketplaces, distribution relationships, new financial products and for international expansion. He explains that there is huge potential for growth in international markets and the startup is constantly being contacted by sellers outside of the U.S. who are interested in Kabbage’s services.  Similar to the way that Square brought credit card mobile access to small businesses and that Greendot brought pre-paid credit cards the unbanked, Kabbage is bringing working capital and small loans to online merchants who may not qualify for a cash infusion from a traditional bank. Like the companies mentioned above, the startup has the definite potential to disrupt the marketplace industry.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, Mountain View-based Ooyala, the fast-growing online video services provider, is announcing that it has landed a big content partner: The so-called “worldwide leader in sports”, ESPN. Those avid sports fans among us may have noticed some changes in the look and speed of videos on ESPN.com. Over the last few weeks, Ooyala has begun integrating its video technology into ESPN’s website, and is now officially powering all of the sports media behemoth’s streaming video content. It’s a serious feather in the cap and vote of confidence for the four-year-old video startup, as ESPN is one of the biggest producers of online video content, with 400 unique visitors hitting play on ESPN videos every second (and serving over 1 billion streams per month), according to Ooyala Co-Founder and President of Product Bismarck Lepe.  For Ooyala, Lepe said, this partnership with ESPN is evidence that it has achieved scale, and in the big picture, shows that the online video industry is at a point where the fundamental building blocks are in place and can support viable, healthy businesses. Another sign that Ooyala has achieved scale? TechCrunchTV uses the service to power its on-demand videos. ESPN VP of Technology and Product Development Jason Guenther told TechCrunch that the company had been using its own video system, based on Disney technology (ESPN is owned by Disney), and had been experimenting with a number of different video platforms and technologies. Yet, the company is at a point, Guenther said, in which it really wants to begin focusing on content and the overall user experience of its digital platform, rather than have to worry over the technology necessary to serve billions of video streams or refining its own video player. The VP of tech said that after vetting a number of third party platforms, Ooyala “landed a bit higher” than its competitors, because it enables the sports giant to shorten video load times and to take advantage of a multi-bit rate that can deliver HD at up to 2.8 Mbps. ESPN’s new player is Flash-based, though users can tap into an HTML5 version on their iPads, and offers dynamic video quality that adjusts to the individual user’s network connection, bandwidth, etc. in order to serve the best quality video according to each viewer’s capacity. For ESPN, not only does Ooyala step up load times and increase playback quality, but the video startup also enables the sports broadcaster to better utilize internal resources by streamlining the management of their videos and related data, according to the announcement made today on Ooyala’s blog. Ooyala also offers its customers a realtime analytics engine, with detailed per-video and per-user reporting for both on-demand and live video streaming, as well as integrations with payment systems so that customers have the ability to launch both paid and ad-supported video business models. ESPN has generally lagged behind its big media competitors in terms of its utilization of social media, so the fact that Ooyala enables visitors to easily share videos via Facebook and Twitter from within the player, is a huge social boost for ESPN.  Guenther told me that scaling has been a big issue for ESPN.com, and the tech team has been looking for ways to take advantage of new mobile channels, as well as keep content quality consistently high on the Web. Ooyala allows ESPN to serve video of consistent quality across platforms and scale effectively. Going forward, he said, ESPN will look to innovate on top of its new video platform, as well as explore ways to beef up and publicize its API. All in all, it’s great to see ESPN finally offering a quality player with fast load times and a more linear on demand experience in which video queues and layouts feel more akin to a television viewing experience — and can compete in ease of video use with YouTube. And for Ooyala, who recently inked a deal with Yahoo! Japan and will soon account for more than 50 percent of all Japanese online video viewership, according to Lepe, this is yet another sign that it is reaching that elusive tipping point. But don’t worry, Ooyala has no plans to change. Latest headlines delivered to you daily More cash is flowing in for social TV apps. Stealthy company Umami has raised $1.65 million in seed funding from Battery Ventures, NEA and other angels for the companion, social TV platform.  While details about Umami are limited, we know the startup’s free iPad app is currently in closed beta with TV networks and is set to launch with the Fall 2011 television season. Similar to apps like Miso and GetGlue, Umami provides TV viewers with a second screen experience to television content. Umami adds additional contextual content around the programs viewers are watching, and also offers a platform for networks to engage with consumers.  Umami was founded by Rovi’s former VP of Advanced Advertising Scott Rosenberg and Bryan Slavin, who has held technology and product roles at Lightningcast (acquired by AOL), Leap Wireless, and Broadsoft.  At Lightningcast, he helped launch broadband video advertising products and solutions with  TV networks and built the the startup’s online video ad network. The startup faces competition from GetGlue, Miso, TV Tune-In and others.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google Ventures-backed LawPivot is blending a Q&A platform with legal advice for businesses, and allows technology companies and startups to confidentially ask legal questions to expert attorneys. But until now, LawPivot has kept the legal communications on its site private, so that only the lawyer and business can access this information. Today, the startup is releasing a public-facing Q&A platform to allows businesses to also ask questions publicly and receive answers from the LawPivot community of users nationwide.   For background, LawPivot was co-founded by a team of lawyers and tech execs, including Jay Mandal, a lead mergers and acquisitions attorney at Apple; Nitin Gupta; an intellectual property litigation lawyer; and Steven Kam, a software engineer and architect with experience as an intellectual property litigation lawyer. On LawPivot Public Q&A, legal experts in specialties like corporate, intellectual property, contracts, employment, tax, and immigration law, can share their expertise and insights with businesses by publicly answering legal questions raised by the LawPivot community.  Of course, businesses can still ask private questions, but this creates a way for lawyers to publish their legal recommendations (and perhaps get more business) and allows startups to build a resource for fellow businesses to use when looking for answers to similar questions. For example, many boot-strapped entrepreneurs could use the public product has a way to get advice for non-complicated matters.  As we’ve written in the past, the startup encourages lawyers to create comprehensive profiles on LawPivot, companies know where their legal advice is coming from. LawPivot will also connects a company to the best-suited lawyers to answer its legal questions. As companies interact with LawPivot over time, the site’s technology will uses past and present data on users and trends to provide a company the best lawyers to answer its question based on the company’s specific needs. The company is also releasing an infographic detailing the most popular legal topics on LawPivot, including a word visualization cloud showing the relative frequency of certain topics raised by businesses on LawPivot in describing the nature of their questions on the site.  The most popular legal questions asked on LawPivot are in the areas or corporate law, intellectual property, contracts and Internet law. The online legal space is growing fast, and companies like Rocket Lawyer and LegalZoom are raising hefty funding rounds. While LawPivot focuses on more of a niche community, the site still has the potential to disrupt the legal space for the business world.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over the last few years, the music industry has endured some serious growing pains. And while the industry still wears its new digital outfit like an ill-fitting coat made of cassettes, I, for one, love hearing about young startups that are trying to make the music industry a better (and more modern) place to hang out and do business. While digital media have given bands access to a wider audience and cheap distribution channels, it’s still as difficult as ever for artists to make a buck and blast their music and brand messages out broadly — yet efficiently and effectively. The early adopter community has gone bonkers over Turntable.fm as a music discovery platform, though it’s true that even Turntable fans are skeptical about its longterm viability. And it’s certainly nice to finally have Spotify in the U.S., as well as cool services like exFm, SoundTracking, Rexly, and eCommerce youngun VibeDeck bringing some funk to the music space. Last month, Brenden Mulligan, the founder of ArtistData (a syndication tool for musicians to post information across the web), launched a new musical venture called Onesheet with a simple mission: Create a simple way for bands to build a real presence on the Web without having to religiously maintain that presence. Bands don’t have a lot of options when it comes to maintaining a simple but unified web identity; sure, there are some great sites for direct-to-fan sales, digital band management, career coaching (and BandCamp, for one, offers some nifty band-webpage-hosting), but many of these sites try to do too much and end up with fragmented user experiences.  So, with the landscape as such and with Keyboard Cat playing Myspace out, Onesheet is stepping onto the scene at a pretty opportune time. Bands want a simple, automatic (and promotion-friendly) way to maintain an eIdentity, and Onesheet does this in a way that’s not unlike About.me. As Alexia wrote last month, Onesheet thus enables bands to create and verify their identities through Facebook or Twitter and connect easily with third party services like Soundcloud, Bandcamp and ReverbNation. (As well as social media services like Posterous, Tumblr and YouTube.)  Bands can customize their Onesheet’s design, making changes to simple stuff like font and widget positioning, but they really don’t have to get their hands dirty, because their pages update themselves through connections with those other third party platforms. With all this in place, today, only one month after its initial launch, Onesheet is coming out of limited beta. What does that mean? When the platform initially launched, one needed an invite or to sit on the waiting list before getting in, but now Onesheet is open and available so that anyone can sign up. And it’s still free.  Another notable update that comes along with moving out of limited beta is that Onesheet is now offering a “preview” version of a “pro account”, (which Mulligan said has been in high demand since launch), that offers a greater degree of customization, including custom domain names, less Onesheet branding, more social network tie-ins, and so on. The pro accounts are currently in preview mode, which means that artists can opt-in to test out the features without paying. When pricing is announced, Mulligan told me, artists will be able to opt-in to keep the enhanced features, or revert back to the basic free account. Among other updates, Onesheet now allows artist to add custom meta tags, customize the navbar, remove the “Onesheet header”, add like/follow buttons, connect Google analytics accounts, create custom icons for mobile, tablets, browsers, and Facebook, as well as the ability to add links to your band’s music on iTunes, Beatport, CD Baby, Topspin, and Bandcamp (or add a custom link for sites Onesheet doesn’t yet support). These new features offer some great additional functionality for what is clearly a rapidly growing user base. Since launching, Onesheet has been on a tear, as Mulligan told me that today over 10,000 artists have signed up to use the service — all in just over one month. Among the artists now using Onesheet are Owl City, who have 6 million Facebook likes, Paramore, which has 18 million FB likes, and Mat Kearney, who spend most of last week as #1 on iTunes. Not too shabby. For now, Onesheet continues in bootstrap mode, but Mulligan is clearly ramping up to begin monetizing through the addition of pro accounts, which will likely roll out in the next few months. It’s a cool site, so get out there and check it out, and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily GetchaBooks, founded by three youngsters (two who are still undergrads at Tufts), has just announced an expanded and improved database of classes and books, pushing the number of schools available in their unique interface from 600 to 1,275. GetchaBooks is different from other services like Chegg and Textbooks.com in that the search system is centered around courses. Rather than typing in “Advanced Dance Movement For Accountancy Students” into a search box, you select your school, your courses, and sections. GetchaBooks then searches its database of courses and finds the required reading for each course. Book.ly and Slugbooks also offer by-coure searches as well, although Getchabooks is a bit more streamlined. The founder, Michael Walker, is charmingly down-to-earth about his creation. “We’re not in it to get rich or famous – there are definitely more glamorous markets to be in than textbooks,” he said. “We’re just three starving students who were frustrated by how much the bookstore was ripping us off who decided to do something about it and help our classmates.” Ah, the naive idealism of youth!  They’re making their cash through Amazon webstore affiliate links so they don’t ship or store any product. There is also no rental provision on their site, something that their-more advanced competitors already have. I also found a few major colleges missing in their list, something that definitely needs to be addressed before this gains a wider audience. However, the goal is noble: to make it much easier for our future leaders/drinkers of America to get their textbooks. It’s an interesting concept that turns the textbook sales equation on its head and I’m totally, as the kids say, down. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Groupchat.tv is a new Facebook application that brings a Google Hangouts-like group video chatting experience to Facebook. The app was created over the course of the weekend, during the HAPI hackathon in San Francisco, by the same folks who run e-commerce site TinyPay.me. And here’s the crazy part – Groupchat.tv supports up to 50 video streams at the same time!  The app’s creators don’t recommend you push Groupchat.tv quite that far, however. But it is notable that there’s not the same hard-coded limit of 10 people per chat as there is over on Google+, where “Hangouts” are one of the site’s key selling points. To video chat on Google+, you launch a Hangout (a video chat session) by clicking a button and then share it with a Circle or Circles, individual friends or the general public, as you choose. To use Groupchat.tv, you must first authorize the Facebook application, then share the special link it generates with your friends. The link can be shared via instant messaging, such as in Facebook’s own chat, for example, via email, Wall post, or however else you choose. Groupchat.tv’s main interface provides you with a Facebook status update box, though, which makes the sharing process relatively easy.  Your friend will also have to authorize the Facebook app before being able to chat with you. In testing Groupchat this morning, we ran into the typical Mac/Flash trouble (it’s doesn’t “just work” – you have to configure your Flash settings here.) However, the app at least provides with a simple “how to” pop-up that explains how to make the necessary changes. Groupchat.tv, which uses Tokbox’s opentok API, isn’t as smooth as either Google Hangouts or Facebook’s own Skype integration, of course. You can hear your voice echoing on your friends’ PC speakers, for example. But if you’re dying to group chat with Facebook friends, it’s certainly worth a look. According to the app’s lead developer, Melvin Tercan (also Tinypay.me’s Co-Founder and CEO), the team is already tossing around ideas for new features, like a public list of group chat that everyone could join. But for now, they’re just hoping the app takes off and goes viral. Think that might happen now? Group video chat with your REAL friends, instead of @scobleizer http://t.co/DmtzJEP — Melvin Tercan (@melvinmt) August 16, 2011  Update: I should have noted that this app posts a message to your Facebook Wall when you launch a chat session. Automatic Wall posts seem par for the course on Facebook, so I wasn’t surprised or taken aback by this. You, however, may feel differently. Be warned!   Correction: This article originally gave credit to Richard Straver because Melvin Tercan emailed us using Richard’s email address. Oops! Latest headlines delivered to you daily Edmonton-based Empire Avenue, the stock market for social influence, announced today that it has raised $1.2 million in series A seed financing. The round was led by San Francisco VC firm Crosslink Capital, with contributions from iNovia Capital, TriplePoint Capital (which incubated Empire Avenue in Silicon Valley), as well as BioWare co-founders Drs. Ray Muzyka and Greg Zeschuk, among others.  According to the startup’s press release, “rather than buying a fancy zeppelin or, say, a tank full of diamond-clad singing sharks”, the team plans to use its new infusion of capital to ramp up hiring and expand its platform, including a focus on growing sales of virtual goods and currency. This is all well and good, but we in the tech community were all really pulling for singing sharks. Or at least monkey butlers. (There’s always the series B.) Empire Avenue, which launched in early 2010, is a so-called “social stock market”, where users take the role of a company and their product value is determined by the level of your online activity and the networks one creates during daily webernets surfings. Essentially, the startup wants to encourage web users to jump start their own personal brands and make the most out of social network interaction (and have a little fun while doing it). Like Klout, with the added benefit of buying and selling virtual shares in the personal brands of real, live human beings, Empire Avenue plugs into a range of sites, including Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn, and Flickr, to show users the value of their influence and reach on popular social networks. Users can also turn the value of their web-based contributions into actual revenue by tapping into an advertising platform used by the startup to deliver relevant and targeted ads, while buying and selling virtual shares in any other user is free. Pretty nifty. As to a user’s personal score: Influence scores are equivalent to an individual’s share price on Empire Avenue, which is calculated by the degree to which a person’s brand is traded on the site over the course of the day, as well as the user’s contributions to their own blogs, websites, social media networks, etc. Shareholders can rate those interactions, voting up quality contributions which affect the stock’s value, while shareholders are at the same time rewarded with virtual currency for successful investments.  In addition to scoring some new investment loot, the Canadian startup is also announcing today the addition of Foursquare and Instagram as sources of further metrics used to calculate a user’s influence and stock value. Not to mention the fact that it now has users in over 190 countries. It’s an awesome service, so take it for a test drive and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Shuffler.fm, an online Web application for music discovery, received a major update today. Now users can play mixes of their favorite blogs, browse the Web’s most popular songs and artists, create personalized channels and more. But what has us even more excited is the upcoming Shuffler.fm iPad application, which provides a visual way to explore new music, optimized for the touchscreen interface. For those unaware, Shuffler.fm is an Amsterdam-based startup co-founded by Tim Heineke of Twones and Tone.fm, along with Marcel Corso and Diederik Martens. The service’s goal is to aggregate music from around the Web based on genre. Previously, users visiting Shuffler’s homepage would simply pick a genre of their choice, like Indie, Electronic, Hip-hop, Folk, etc., in order to play tracks from music blogs around the Web. The tracks are pulled from a curated list of music blogs, categorized using Last.fm’s API, then filed accordingly. But unlike other popular music aggregators, such as The Hype Machine for example, Shuffler.fm is not just about aggregating the music itself, it’s about providing added context and value. By taking you direclty to the music blog where the song is hosted, Shuffler.fm users have the opportunity to learn more about the track, the band or the artist, as well as the music blogs themselves. The site has often been described as a “StumbleUpon” for music because of this feature.  What’s New Today, Shuffler’s Web users will have access to a few more options, including the ability to play a favorite blog as a continuous mix, a search function for finding favorite artists and blogs and a personalized music channel built by favoriting individual tracks and blogs.  In addition, music blogs can now set up their own accounts at shuffler.fm/blogs. These blogs will offer special features designed for the service, like a “Play this Blog” button which launches that blog’s own channel. All the new features will launch today, at approximately 12 PM EST. iPad App Coming Soon We also got a sneak peak at the upcoming Shuffler.fm iPad application, which brings the Shuffler.fm experience to the touchscreen. The ability to navigate through touches and swipes brings back a feeling reminiscent of flipping through album covers and tearing into liner notes, we found.   As you can see from the images, the Shuffler iPad app is very similar to the Web version, in that you also pick a genre and surf through blogs. But on the iPad, the app offers a more simplified feature set. Besides the standard play/pause controls and volume button, there’s just a favoriting button and sharing feature, which keeps the interface uncluttered and easy-t0-use. The experience of using Shuffler.fm on the tablet is less akin to StumbleUpon, and more like a Flipboard for music, as it provides that casual, “lean-back” consumption experience the iPad is known for.  The iPad app will be out in just a couple of weeks, Heineke says, depending on how quickly Apple reviews it. We’re certainly looking forward to its launch. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It seems that every day another company in the tech industry hits an important milestone, but the one achieved today by Kontagent, the social analytics platform for app developers, is pretty impressive. The fbFund winner is now tracking over 150 million monthly active users (MAUs) and is handling over 1 billion messages per day. Broken down, that’s 15,000+ messages per second, or more than twice the number of tweets than Twitter processed at its peak during the women’s World Cup finals. Since February, Kontagent has added tracking for another 50 million users and has more than doubled the number of messages its processing. The words “aggressive scaling” come to mind.  This scaling is likely due to the fact that, last month, the startup moved beyond simply tracking analytics for developers on Facebook and added tracking for web and mobile apps (not on FB) as well. The new platform, called kSuite, builds on the startup’s prior functionality by giving developers new and improved ways of tracking and optimizing advertising efforts, user virality, in-app mechanics, virtual goods, and currency monetization. All told, Kontagent now has more than 1,100 active social and mobile applications using its on-demand enterprise software, including Ubisoft, Time Warner, A&E Networks, EA, and Tencent, to name a few. As many of the startup’s larger clients have been making investments in social gaming (EA today acquired Bight Games and acquired PopCap last month), the company is now tracking one in every four dollars spent by social gamers.  Some recent big moves by the four-year-old startup certainly seem to be paying off, but we’ll see how fluidly Kontagent scales as it continues hoovering up new users and customers. And although the company has raised over $5 million to date, I wouldn’t be surprised if they’re on track for a new round in the not-so-distant future. But that’s just speculation, don’t quote me on that. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Acquia, a commercial open source software company that provides products, services, and technical support for the Drupal social publishing system, is expanding its product portfolio with the acquisitions of Cyrve, a provider of Drupal migration services, and Growing Venture Solutions, a provider of Drupal security services. Terms of the acquisitions were not disclosed. As a result of the deals, Acquia is today introducing Acquia Migration Services and Acquia Security Services for Drupal enterprise website owners. The first includes a suite of software tools, modules and best practices to help organizations migrate content from legacy web content management and social software systems such as WordPress or SharePoint to Drupal. For more perspective on the Cyrve acquisition, check out co-founder Moshe Weitzman’s blog post. The Acquia Security Services practice includes tools and services to assess Drupal site security and implement security strategies based on best practices. Acquia, which was co-founded by Dries Buytaert, the original creator and project lead of the open source Drupal project, recently raised $15 million of a planned $20 million equity round, bringing the company’s total funding to more than $38 million. Acquia backers include North Bridge Venture Partners, Sigma Partners, Tenaya Capital and O’Reilly AlphaTech Ventures. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Groupon rival BuyWithMe has acquired Scoop St., a social commerce company focused on the New York City market. Scoop St. was founded in 2009 and grew organically in the group buying space, using a model similar to Groupon. On Scoop St., one-time deals, called “Scoops,” were only made available when a large enough group of people were interested. The company also introduced unique features, like branded events called “Experiences” and a membership loyalty program called “Perks.” Scoop St. says it will continue to offer the best Scoops and Experiences in New York with BuyWithMe. Scoop St. members will begin receiving BuyWithMe offers for New York via email, but can also chose more local deals in 13 other U.S. markets. BuyWithMe’s New York website will feature all the deals available for the New York area. And for Scoop St. members who have previously purchased Scoops, the vouchers will be made available for download here. More information about how this deal affects current Scoop St. customers has been posted to Scoop St.’s blog. BuyWithMe launched in 2009 and now operates in Austin, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, Philadelphia, Phoenix, San Diego, San Francisco, Seattle and Washington D.C. This is its 5th acquisition so far this year. It previously acquired Chicago deals site DealADayOnline, San Francisco deals site Swoop, loyalty company Edhance, and deals site LocalTwist. Terms of the deal were not disclosed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last year, Eric Schmidt, the former CEO of Google, told a crowd gathered at the Techonomy Conference in Lake Tahoe, CA that we now create as much information in two days as we did from the dawn of civilization through 2003. While Roger J. Moore would disagree and amend that estimation slightly, the fact of the matter is that today we’re seeing a ridiculous (and exponential) telescoping in data production and consumption — which will only continue to increase. Thus, in today’s world, data is becoming a valuable commodity. Many companies strive to collect as much data about their customer’s habits and interactions as possible to better serve them with ads, recommendations, discovery tools, and personalized product or service experiences (and so on). But, the fact of the matter is, big data management and analysis is still clunky and without being able to understand what that big data means — without being able to identify the important relationships, connections, and patterns within the data — it’s just a big pile of numbers and symbols. What’s more, as more and more datapoints are pulled in by social networks (and as those networks scale) with servers often scattered across large geographical zones, it becomes tougher and tougher on backend systems to process the complex connections between data.  InfiniteGraph, the year-old product and brainchild of Sunnyvale-based enterprise database company Objectivity, is coming out of beta today to help developers and companies identify and utilize deep connections between nodes and edges in large, distributed data sets. InfiniteGraph seeks to reduce the amount of time it takes to make these connections to a matter of seconds, processing large graph datasets, in areas like government intelligence, social networks and social media CRM, location-based services, and financial analytics. Working with these kind of large enterprises requires support for billions of data points, and so InfiniteGraph has built a system to enable scaling and big data capacity, with realtime functionality. Today, InfiniteGraph is expanding its reach to businesses and developers looking to mine their data stores for complex relationships, be they enterprise apps targeting SMBs, SMEs themselves, or Fortune 500 companies. But the important thing to point out about InfiniteGraph’s commercial release (the system has been being developed in beta over the last year) is that it doesn’t require developers to re-engineer their databases from scratch to benefit from the technology. Developers can simply use the platform’s dedicated graph API to leverage InfiniteGraph’s relationshop mining on top of their existing data. It also offers a high-scale database management system, which is a nice bonus.  Other features of note in InfiniteGraph’s commercial release include parallel data loading and accelerated ingest, meaning that developers can import and continuously feed apps with data from multiple input streams more speedily. The graph database also allows developers to choose from different indexing options that suit their company’s specific needs (from automatic to manual), as well as enabling devs to view, verify, and test data models in customizable approaches. As InfiniteGraph aims to help companies leverage social network analysis and business intelligence to increase efficiency and gain competitive advantage in crowded markets, the graph database will now be available in both free and licensed versions. (Check out licensed options here.) As to compatibility, InfiniteGraph’s database is written in Java (with a C++ core), is interoperable across Linux, Windows and Mac OS/X platforms, and “can also be deployed in most virtualized cloud environments”, according to its website. The platform is also licensed on a “pay as you scale” or usage-based model that allows companies to expand their storage capacity (and aims at being a more cost effective way to use).  InfiniteGraph is also announcing a contest for developers, which will offer up to $12,000 in prizes, in addition to helping developers promote their apps. The contest launches today and will be accepting submissions through September 30th. According to an InfiniteGraph spokesperson, “developers can build any type of software application, web or mobile service around social, game and/or location-based networks, any type of process or knowledge management, or anything else which seeks to find and leverage complex relationships between objects or things”. For more on the contest, check it out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online video technology and footage licensing services provider Thought Equity Motion has raised $25 million from Shamrock Capital Advisors, the company announced this morning. The company delivers video archive management and “smart content” metadata tools as a cloud service, as well as rights development expertise. Through its Web platform and global sales force, the company licenses a wide range of sports, news, entertainment, editorial, and creative content. Thought Equity offers its video technology and management infrastructure solutions to media companies, news organizations, sports right holders and video production companies worldwide. Customers include BBC, Paramount, National Geographic, Sony Pictures Entertainment and the NYT. The company says ‘tens of thousands’ of video producers use its video licensing platform on a daily basis. Thought Equity’s new investor, Shamrock Capital Advisors, is an independent Los Angeles-based private equity firm focused on the media, entertainment, and communications industries.  In 2010, Shamrock’s private equity activities were formally separated from Shamrock Holdings, the family office for the late Roy E. Disney, a longtime senior executive for The Walt Disney Company, which his father Roy Oliver Disney and his uncle Walt Disney founded. Thought Equity CEO Kevin Schaff told The Denver Post that a small portion of the funds from Shamrock Capital Partners has been used to pay off an old investor. Latest headlines delivered to you daily peerTransfer, a simple payment solution designed for international students, today announced that it has closed a $7.5 million series A financing round. The investment was led by Spark Capital, with participation from Accel Partners, Maveron, and Boston Seed Capital.  The new infusion of capital adds to the $1.1 million in seed funding the startup raised back in October of last year, bringing total investment to just north of $8.6 million. The startup plans to use its recent round to increase hiring and development of its infrastructure, as it continues to partner with colleges and universities across the country to simplify international education payments.  Founded in 2009, peerTransfer targets international students in attempt to provide them with a simple and secure payment method to quickly and securely make tuition (and other education-related) payments. The startup aims to save international students money by eliminating high transfer fees and by offering discounted exchange rates. The value proposition for educational institutions, on the other hand, is that peerTransfer’s solution captures student ID info at the time of payment so that schools know that the full payment has been received and contains the necessary info to post immediately to student accounts. The startup is currently working with 30 institutions, including Auburn University, Georgia State University, Miami University, Reed College, Wellesley College and Western Kentucky University in an effort to streamline international payment processing, while giving students some peace of mind and an opportunity to save thousands of dollars over the course of their education. The best part is that peerTransfer is free of charge for educational institutions and requires no engineering or coding knowledge to implement the solution for institutions. As international students in the U.S. lose more than $1 billion per year from bad currency exchange rates and banking fees, according to peerTransfer Founder and CEO Iker Marcaide, the startup is looking to bundle transactions to secure higher-volume purchases and to take advantage of more favorable exchange rates.  The startup’s workaround involves eliminating intermediary transaction fees in order to save students money and, at the same time, works to reduce administrative overhead by ensuring accurate delivery and posting of funds to student accounts.  It’s an innovative, if not slightly risky business model: In that the company doesn’t charge students or schools any money for its service, and instead shares in the savings generated by students thanks to its ability to take advantage of more favorable currency exchange rates. Music to the ears of international students to be sure. For more on peerTransfer, visit them at home here. Or check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily It was less than three months ago that Jake Winebaum (the same guy who sold Business.com for $360 million) quietly launched Brighter.com, an online marketplace for discounted dental care. As Erick Schonfeld wrote at the time, Americans pay an estimated $55 billion out of pocket each year on dental bills. Dental plans, like their healthcare brethren, tend to take sizable bites out of our wallets without giving a whole lot in return. Except a PPO. So, Winebaum launched Brighter.com to allow patients to compare over 25,000 U.S. dentists by price and reputation in an effort to let those in need of dental care cut their bills in half and reduce those out-of-pocket expenses. Brighter launched in May with $5 million already in the bank, which it raised from Mayfield Fund, a Menlo Park-based VC firm, back in January. Today, Winebaum and Brighter added to their overall investment, closing an $8 million series B funding round led by Benchmark Capital. Mayfield also participated in the startup’s series B raise. According to the Brighter team, the new infusion of capital from Benchmark and Mayfield Fund will be used to continue a few the startup’s growth initiatives, including ramping up consumer marketing and continuing to build on its network of 25,000 dentists offering discounted dental work (approximately one quarter of the total number of dentists in the U.S.). The new round, which brings the startup’s overall investment to over $13 million (raised in a year and a half), is a testament to the fact that Brighter is offering a much needed service. Allowing users to perform a simple search based on location and procedure to find nearby dentists, how much they charge and what type of discount they are currently offering, essentially brings comparison shopping to dental care — an approach that seems so familiar it’s a wonder it hasn’t been done before. Search results include dentist’s ratings, rates, and proximity, including Yelp reviews, and even enables users to add their own reviews of the dentists they visit or “like” them on Facebook if they were generous with the laughing gas. Brighter offers 20 to 30 percent discounts for free and up to 60 percent off if a users buys the $79 annual plan. The startup offers both individual and small business memberships, with the latter costing about $49 per employee, a huge benefit to the many SMBs and startups looking to provide cheap insurance to their employees. And the best part? As Schonfeld wrote in May, thanks to being a solution that circumvents insurance, there are no caps and no procedures. Users know how much the procedure will cost right off the bat, and dentists are buying in because they get paid directly (and immediately) and don’t have to haggle with insurance companies after the fact.  It’s a smart solution to an endemic insurance problem, and $8 million more in the bank from Benchmark and Mayfield certainly doesn’t hurt confidence in Winebaum’s new approach to reducing dental costs. Though it looks like users of this Student Doctor Network forum beg to differ. On the other hand, this is probably a startup even Homer Simpson could get excited about. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Security researchers at Trend Micro have discovered a new mobile malware application on Android that disguises itself as a Google+ app. The app has the capability to record phone calls, as well as gather the GPS location of the handset, the text messages and the call logs, all of which are sent off to remote servers. The app installs itself on Android devices under the guise of being a Google+ application, using the Google+ icon to disguise itself in both the Android applications list and the list running services. The malware is a variant of the previously-discovered ANDROIDOS_NICKISPY.A and .B, as it uses the same code structure found within those applications. This particular variant is being called ANDROIDOS_NICISPY.C. In this case, at least, it does not appear that the malware is particularly widespread, as it is not listed in the Android Market. The app only appears to be installed on users’ handsets who unknowingly visit a malicious website. And removal is as simple as uninstalling the app. What’s interesting here is how quickly malware authors have used the hype about Google’s new social network to their advantage. Not even 2 months old, and Google+ is already being used as the cover for mobile malware.  In addition to recording calls and gathering personal data from the device, the malware is also able to receive commands via text message, explains Trend Micro threat analyst Mark Balanza. To do so, it requires the sender to use the predefined “controller” number from the app’s configuration file in order to execute any commands. But what makes this malware particularly unique, says Balanza, is its ability to record incoming phone calls automatically, something which the other variants did not. In order to answer calls, the phone’s screen must be turned off and the call has to come from a certain phone number in the app’s configuration file. Before answering, the app puts the phone in silent mode and hides the dial pad. And when the phone call is connected, the screen goes blank.  It’s important to note that the “auto-answering” feature of the malware can only affect phones running Android versions 2.2 and below, as the MODIFY_PHONE_STATE permission was disabled in Android 2.3. This, again, is another very good example as to why manufacturers and carriers should not hold back Android OS updates from being pushed down to consumers’ devices.  The Android operating system is increasingly the target for malware such as this, security firm Lookout reported earlier this month. Android users are two-and-a-half times more likely to encounter malware today than just 6 months ago. And half a million to one million users have been affected by Android malware this year alone. While this individual app may only be a minor threat, when combined with all the others over the course of many months, the malware threat is becoming a concern for Android users, developers, carriers and OEMs alike. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Considering that current forecasts estimate that as many as 8 trillion text messages will be sent in 2011, and that people are increasingly turning away from landlines in preference to mobile communication, SMS is becoming an increasingly important part of a business’ communication strategies. And this is especially relevant when it comes to customer service.  As businesses move to incorporate SMS into customer service and CRM, they face several challenges, among them the fact that customers often have separate numbers for voice and text and that messages sent from devices or SMS apps outside of the company’s CRM system are tricky to manage and record for quality. M5, the provider of VoIP and phone services for businesses, is today partnering with Bluewolf (a business consulting firm) to announce a handy tool (called “M5 Business SMS”) aimed at solving these problems by enabling a company’s customers to text from their mobile phone using their business number, saving them the hassle of having to use two different numbers or having to use their personal cell numbers for business communications.  But what’s most noteworthy here is that M5 is partnering with Salesforce to integrate this SMS feautre directly into Salseforce’s CRM software. This means that business users can now send and receive SMS messages using their business telephone number, integrating all text-based communication into Salesforce’s “Service Cloud”, which in turn allows customer service teams to make SMS messaging a measurable service cannel. According to M5, incoming SMS messages will automatically become part of cases, enabling Salesforce clients to track conversations and keep a complete record of customer communications. And, seeing as a business phone number is used as the channel for SMS, users no longer need to have their own separate phone numbers. For businesses, SMS is a great tool for service issue or order status updates, appointment confirmations, purchase authorizations, to name a few. And as businesses increasingly interact with their customers via text, it becomes of equal importance for these businesses to track and analyze these customer interactions and compare to business data to ensure quality customer care and service. Not to mention, for those 82,000-plus Salesforce customers, offering the ability to send and receive SMS messages from their business telephone numbers, eliminating the need for a separate texting app or phone number, definitely comes in handy.  For more, check out the M5 Business SMS solution for Salesforce here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInLean Startup Thinker Eric Ries: “Don’t Be In A Rush To Get Big, Be In A Rush To Have A Great Product”Every tech founder thinks he or she runs a lean startup.  But what exactly does that mean?  In the video interview above Eric Ries, who came up with the term The Lean Startup and is the author of an upcoming book of the same name, explains his theory, which boils down to learning from a small number of early customers to improve and perfect your product before exposing it to a wider audience. “Don’t be in a rush to get big,” he sums up at the end of our interview, “be in a rush to have a great product.” Ries argues that an entrepreneur’s greatest advantage is their obscurity.  If your first product sucks, at least not too many people will know about it.  But that is the best time to make mistakes, as long as you learn from them to make the product better. “It is inevitable that the first product is going to be bad in some ways,” he says.  The Lean Startup methodology is a way to systematically test a company’s product ideas.   Fail early and fail often.  “Our goal is to learn as quickly as possible,” he says.  He also argues that startups should launch their products quietly until they figure out what customers really want.  We discuss how Color could have used that advice.  Ries also gives me a crash course in some of the increasingly popular Lean Startup terminology, such as “minimal viable product,” “product/market fit,” or “build-measure-learn feedback loops.”   But can you build a lean startup in a bubble (if we are still in one)?  “It is even more important,” he says, to go lean when everyone is throwing money at “success theater” and showing off vanity metrics.  “Vanity metrics are the numbers you want to publish on TechCrunch to make your competitors feel bad,” he says.  Don’t believe your own propaganda, or run your company on those metrics.  ACtionable metrics that actually allow you to understand what drives your growth are much more important. Ries writes about lean startups at Startup Lessons Learned, and will be speaking at Disrupt SF. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Office inventory management systems: Not exactly the world’s sexiest software to be sure. Yet, without inventory and asset management systems, many enterprises would likely work at a similar pace to the DMV. Currently, SMBs have no shortage of tools to choose from when selecting a software system for tracking office assets and inventory; however, most of these options involve working tirelessly with Excel or using some kind of desktop product, like TurboSystems, Data Village, or FoxFales, to name a few. If a company has more than a few dozen employees, though, Excel and desktop solutions can be a pain in the ass. Syed Ali, a former Sun Microsystems employee (before the company was acquired by Oracle) and his team of IT and software geeks, said that they had grown tired of having to deal with repeated occurrences of outdated and incorrect office inventory in today’s tracking solutions. Syed said that he and his team have collectively worked with many  different companies that, for example, do in fact keep lists of office assets, but specific information related to who has what (like tracking records of check outs) is often completely missing or worse outdated — not to mention the fact that misplaced assets are often assigned the wrong employee who may not even work at the company anymore. The problems, as one can imagine, are numerous. To help resolve these issues, Syed and his team are today launching EZOfficeInventory, a SaaS-based solution that approaches asset management untraditionally through a delegation model, in which the responsibility of inventory tracking is shared by employees, reducing the workload on the administrators.  The solution enables pooled office assets to be tracked with ease through a checkout and checkin mechanism for employees as well as an activity newsfeed for administrators, allowing them to review and take charge only when needed. Employees can also identify available assets that they need to get their jobs done and can get access to manuals and drivers instantaneously. Since EZOfficeInventory resides in the cloud, the solution employs QRCodes as asset tags so that, with an asset’s unique URL embedded in the QRCode, employees can quickly reference asset details and identify the rightful owner in the event something gets lost. And employees can do this with a quick scan from an iPhone or Android device installed with a QRCode reader and web access.  The solution also works to minimize the effort involved in audits, as administrators can request pictures of the asset or other custom workflows from employees with a few clicks. EZOffice also lets administrators view reports on usage, track checkouts and checkins, the total cost of ownership, and even service history on their company’s assets.  Companies can also change the security settings in their solution so that it is compatible with existing workflows and add further privacy features when necessary. Some readers may find the following newsfeed image to be reminiscent of Basecamp (the well known product released by 37Signals, the same company that is home to David Heinemeier Hansson, the guy who created Ruby on Rails). EZOfficeInventory is also implemented in Ruby on Rails, as Syed says that he is “an avid fan” of the web development framework. EZOfficeInventory offers a free two-month trial of its cloud app, with packages for more than two users beginning at $29 per month. The asset management system is still in the very early stages (and the startup is bootstrapped at this point) at this point, and there’s work to be done on the website’s design and UI (and on the name as well), but the software itself is attacking an important pain point for many small and medium sized businesses. While putting the responsibility of asset management into the hands of employees (along with, of course, a system of checks and balances) may well prove to enhance efficiency and trust among those employees, it is risky. But Syed says that this is “part of the fun of merging enterprise with web development” and the very process of using web tech to target enterprise level problems. It’s a shot at the status quo, and the CEO believes it’s a shot worth taking in spite of the risk. For more on EZOfficeInventory, click here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily From its founding in 2007, Taptu was a startup that specialized in search and touch-based interfaces for mobile, launching a realtime mobile search engine in conjunction with OneRiot back in 2009, for example. In November of last year, however, the startup made the smart decision to bring its mobile search proficiency into the news reader market, launching Flipboard-like Android and iPhone apps that brought an interesting value proposition to bear on the burgeoning mobile reader market: Users could aggregate more than 5,000 mixed streams — no paltry number, and far more than that offered by the competition. In April, Taptu launched on the iPad with a sleek and clean design that, again, worked to differentiate itself from competitors like Flipboard, Pulse, Flud (and perhaps Editions) by bringing its proprietary mobile search tech to bear on the aggregation of thousands of news sources, rather than relying on those tired RSS feeds.   As some readers may know, the National Football League had been in the grips of a contentious lockout that put the 2011 season in jeopardy. The owners and players were recently able to come to terms, ending the lockout on July 25th, and allowing the pigskin show to go on. Seeing as football is back on, not wanting to miss out on a golden opportunity to expand their feature set, Taptu is today entering into a new athletic domain with the launch of a NFL fantasy football news stream for Taptu users on both smartphones and tablets. The new stream enables fans to receive updates on every critical stat and news item in realtime, allowing fantasy footballers to field a competitive team each and every week. As my colleague MG wrote last week, the sports world has largely been underrepresented on tablets and news readers, because ESPN (the behemoth of sports content) has basically been absent from the space — at least in terms of partnering with other developers or startups to syndicate their content. But last week, Pulse dropped a bomb on the news reader tablet market by announcing that it was the first player in the space to receive an infusion of ESPN content, along with existing content from Bleacher Report, Yahoo Sports, and so on. While this was a big win for Pulse, there is still an even more coveted, niche demographic that remains underrepresented on tablets, which would be none other than fantasy sports. Fantasy sports are currently played by over 27 million Americans; it’s becoming an increasingly popular pastime (and money maker). And for those who are involved, or have friends who play, fantasy sports are by and large a rabid group. Though it depends on the sport, in order to field the best team each week, fantasy sports players have to consume a lot of information about who’s playing well, including what players are injured, or under-performing, etc. Fantasy sports enthusiasts consume a lot of news and statistics, they do their homework, like analysts, or enterprising journalists — obviously a great customer to have if you’re a mobile startup.  Over the next 30 days, loads of football fans will be building out their teams on their desktops and mobile devices in preparation for the start of the season. And now, thanks to Taptu, those fans no longer have to visit multiple websites to get the lowdown on a trade or injury. Plus, Taptu’s fantasy feature lets users mix and match from football’s big publications and blogs into one stream, making the information easy to read and glance over. And, in a nose-thumbing at Pulse, Taptu will feature breaking news from ESPN, SB Nation, Fox and CBS Sports, among others. To find the app’s fantasy football stream, users simply go to the “Stream Store” and look for the fantasy football icon, click “+”, and the stream will be added to a user’s news collection. As before, Taptu is available for free on iOS (here) as well as Android phones and tablets (here). Latest headlines delivered to you daily PicPlum is a new photo-sharing startup which aims to make the curation, printing and mailing of physical photos easier than before. The service, founded by Paul Stamatiou and Akshay Dodeja, is targeted towards parents who want to send out printed photos of their children to friends and family. However, unlike the photo-printing powerhouses, Shutterfly and Snapfish, the idea isn’t to print out all your digital photos as cheaply as possible. With PicPlum, it’s about enhancing the overall experience of sending and receiving photos by mail. PicPlum encourages its users to select only their best photos, which are then printed using a high quality chemical process and packaged into attractive envelopes prior to shipping. The end result is something more beautiful and more engaging than anything you would receive from a traditional print shop.  Subscription Services for Printed Photos The service has another key benefit, too – it’s automated. Every month, a new batch of photos is sent out for you through the service, without any effort on your part. Although there is a pay-as-you-go option for those who don’t care for subscription services, the monthly option is the better deal. For $7 per month, you can choose 15 photos sent to one address. For another $7, you can choose a second recipient. And if you want to add extra photos to the batch, it’s $0.50 each. Pay-as-you-go users, meanwhile, pay $0.50 per photo plus shipping ($1.50 in the U.S, and rates may vary for international orders). PicPlum is offering a special to TechCrunch readers which gives you a 2nd recipient for free, in addition to the one-month free trial.  Click here to use the TechCrunch promo code.     To be fair, this service is 5 times more expensive than those from larger companies, like Shutterfly or Snapfish, which typically charge 9-cents per photo. Either of those companies could easily launch something similar, and undercut PicPlum on price. But what sets PicPlum apart at present is the automation. Throughout the month, you selectively email in your best photos, or upload them directly to the site. You don’t have to remember to do anything else – which, as any parent will tell you, is a huge plus. Curation is Key There’s also something to this idea of curation. Thanks to the ubiquity of digital cameras and camera phones, it’s easy to accumulate large collections of photos, containing hundreds of photos, if not thousands. Family and friends (as much as they love your little one!), don’t really have the time to sift through those online photos to select those they wish to print. So instead, you select the best photos and the rest is handled for you.  In a way, PicPlum is like the analog counterpart to my current favorite photo-sharing application Photogram, which asks you to pick 4 photos to sent out via an email decorated with a pretty theme.  In PicPlum’s case, the “theme” is an attractive envelope and the digital photos are physical prints.  (But if you still prefer email, PicPlum also supports unlimited email recipients for free.) About the Founders & Company The company’s founders have previous startup experience. Stamatiou co-founded mobile notifier platform Notifo, and Dodja co-founded music startup Mugasha. PicPlum acquired the assets of a previous Y-Combinator company PicWing, and took over its printer relationship and initial user base. The company currently has $150,000 in funding offered by SV Angel and Yuri Miller to all Y-Combinator startups earlier this year. The founders say they are beginning their fundraising now, and will be looking to hire soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yokto is a newly launched video platform which offers an embeddable player that intelligently switches between a Flash-based interface or HTML5, depending on the device being used to view the content. This idea on its own is not original, of course. Similar solutions from companies like Brightcove, Ooyala, Kaltura and SublimeVideo, for example, offer much of the same thing. But where Yokto stands out is in its “playlists” feature. Instead of simply embedding a single video on your website or blog, you can collect a series of videos from multiple sources and embed them on your website within a single player interface. Yokto currently lets you select videos from YouTube, Vimeo, Dailymotion, Brightcove, Ustream and Photobucket, as well as  presentations from SlideShare. After signing up for an account, you’re walked through a series of steps to search for videos, organize them into playlists, choose a player type and grab an embed code. The entire process is incredibly easy and really fast.  Another benefit to Yokto’s service is the wide variety of player options it offers. For example, you can choose to have your playlist displayed on the right or bottom of the video, choose a “theater format” player, display videos as a wall of thumbnails, and more. All players include social sharing buttons, too, which will post links that direct users back to your website when clicked.  After the player is embedded on your website, any further changes to the playlist made on the Yokto website are immediately and automatically reflected in the player inteface, without any need to update the embed code on your end. Pricing Plans for Pro Users, Hook into S3 or CloudFront Yokto offers a Pro service for advanced users, which allows you to upload your own videos to the service. These videos are then encoded into multiple formats and intelligently served based on the end users’ device. On iOS devices, they’re also optimized for screen resolution, format and bitrate on iOS devices, Yokto’s Chief Tech Evangelist, Oojal Jhutti tells us. Pro users can choose connect to Amazon S3 or CloudFront accounts to Yokto, which will then push all the encoded content back into those hosted accounts, for full control over your files. Yokto’s basic service is free to use, and Pro users are being offered one month free trial right now. There are different levels of paid service avaiable, starting at $0.10 per video and up. Pay-as-you-go pricing is available here. Yokto was founded in late 2010, and is led by CEO Ross Alderson, who has been involved in many technology startups over the years, and who co-founded UK’s The Register. The company is privately funded by Powershift Media Ltd. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Six-week old mobile application Banjo has been updated with a new feature that lets users virtually stalk locations, and the people there, in real-time. Banjo, for those unaware, is a new social discovery service which reveals the social network present at any given location at a particular time. To be clear, it’s not another social network, it’s a layer on top of social networks. With Banjo, you don’t have to create a profile, add friends or collect followers, or perform any of the other typical social networking behaviors. Instead, to use Banjo, you simply launch the app to see what the people around you are saying and doing right now. The app pulls its data from social networking services like Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare, Gowalla, TwitPic and Instagram, accessing both the publicly available check-ins and the geotags that accompany status updates and posts. When Banjo first launched, it offered a “Map” feature which let you pick a point on the included Google Maps interface to virtually travel to that location, and see who was there. However, the feature was cumbersome to use because you weren’t able to type in a search box, specifying an actual location – you had to drag-and-drop the map to reposition it. Virtual Tourist, Virtual Location Stalker But now, you can enter in any address supported by Google Maps in order to discover that location’s hidden social network, whether the location you seek is a city, a street address or even the name of a local business. There are certainly some use cases for this feature that will appeal to mainstream users – perhaps you’re curious what people think of tonight’s concert, for example, or what people at a conference are posting pictures of or are tweeting about.  However, as an online journalist, the immediate appeal of the search feature comes from the possibilities it presents for enhancing the reporting process. Imagine being able to virtually visit the streets of London during last weekend’s riots and seeing the streams of information arising from popular social networking services in real-time. The benefit is not only the ease with which you can view this sort of public data, it’s that you can confirm those people are really there. With services like Twitter, anyone from anywhere can post an update using a hashtag (a keyword preceded by a # sign, e.g. #londonriots) to join the public conversation about that topic. But in some cases, it’s critical to know that a person is actually there when they’re posting an update – a feature which would allow journalists to then reach out to those immediately at the site an event’s occurrence, in the midst of the action. Banjo makes this possible, as it only looks at updates that have geo-coordinates attached. Public Information is Easily Discoverable The fact that it’s now so easy to reveal this sort of data should be a reminder to you that what you post publicly the Internet is indeed public. And Banjo is not the only app that’s making easier to uncover this kind of information. Its nearest competitor, Sonar, a TechCrunch Disrupt startup, has a similar take on location-based social networking, except that it ranks the people at a given location by how many friends you have in common. In other words, instead of revealing a location’s hidden social network, it’s showing you your own expanded social network at a given location. Coming Soon: More Apps, More Features, More Social Networks Banjo plans to add a dozen more social networks in the next couple of weeks, and has added or is in the process of adding dozens of new features, including the ability to save photos, share them via social networks, email, or SMS, plus performance and speed improvements. Banjo is currently available on iPhone and Android, but is expanding to other platforms in the future. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Facebook is working with a number of partners to prepare for the launch of a music service – possibly called ‘Vibes’ – inside the astoundingly popular social networking site. While you wait, I advise you to check out the amazing +Music extension for Google Chrome (here’s a direct link to the extension). It’s pretty cool. Once installed, you’ll find a new icon in the Chrome toolbar that lets you quickly search for an artist, stream music and discover links to the artist’s profiles on Facebook, Rdio, Wikipedia, Last.fm and whatnot. The music gets fetched from Blog MP3s or Rdio (subscription required) and you can click the icon to play and pause music mixes, jump to the next track or queue songs. On any web page you visit, you can now highlight the name of an artist, right-click, and instantly play or queue a mix of songs from said artist. The video below shows you how that works. Now that’s all really nice, but here’s where it gets interesting. +Music integrates deeply with Facebook and allows you to share full songs with friends, even if they don’t have the extension installed. It also adds a layer of usefulness on top of Facebook, so when you visit the social network you’ll see a number of enhancements that will enable you to enjoy music with a mere click of the mouse. For one, on top of Facebook you’ll see a mini-player that lets you play, pause and skip tracks, so no more need to open the +Music dialog box by clicking the icon in the toolbar.  In the ‘Share’ section, you’ll also see a ‘Music’ option that lets you search for an artist, album or track where you’d normally post a status update. You can use it to share YouTube videos or instantly streamable songs or even full albums (MP3s found on blogs Web-wide, or from Rdio).  The screenshot below gives you an idea of what it looks like. To achieve the above, the add-on uses Facebook’s Open Graph protocol to embed streamable music when you share a track – no authentication required – while the swarm.fm website acts as a home for any content shared via +Music (with more to come, developer Peter Watts tells me).  It doesn’t stop there. The +Music extension also spruces up artist or band pages, adding a button for instant music streaming or queuing next to their name. In addition, the extension shows you similar artists or bands in the left column of their Facebook page. Again, see screenshot below. Much of the technology behind the +Music extension is powered by The Echo Nest. If you’re interested in other nifty music apps, be sure to give Ex.fm and Shuffler.fm a whirl.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Y Combinator has just unveiled the dates and times of its 7th Annual Startup School; 2011’s event will take place on October 29th at Stanford University, where hundreds will gather to listen to talks about entrepreneurship and innovation by some of the Valley’s most influential founders and investors. While the event is free, it is always extremely popular. Attendees must fill out an application form, with a September 28th deadline, and founders and aspiring founders will find out whether they’ve been accepted on October 4th.  Past Y Combinator Startup Schools have included talks from Mark Zuckerberg, Ron Conway, Paul Graham and Andrew Mason, which explains the high demand. Posterous founder and Y Combinator part-time advisor Garry Tan describes why the experience was so unique, “Startup School 2008 was my first interaction with YC — I didn’t know anything about starting a startup even though I had worked at one. It is probably the most direct way to get valuable wisdom from the most brilliant people in the industry, meet others like you… real hackers and future founders, not like any other startup conference.” We will of course be covering it just like we did last year. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile Q&A service Opinionaided has raised $4.3 million in funding led by SoftBank Capital and BlueRun Ventures with General Catalyst, Draper Fisher Jurvetson, Mark Wachen, Jonah Goodhart, Karl Jacob, ENIAC Ventures and Vince Monical participating. This brings the company’s total funding to $5.3 million. Opinionaided’s free iOS app allows users to get advice and opinions on the fly. Within the app, users can input a question, determine a category (i.e. relationships, politics) and submit it for other Opinionaided users to answer. You can also publish your questions to Facebook and Twitter.  After a question is posted, fellow Opinionaided users can comment on the question and the app will calculate the percentage of users that responded positively or negatively. From there, consumers can reply back to the comments or create a new question for peers to vote on. To date, Opinionaided’s users have delivered 125 million responses to consumer questions since launch last year. As we reported in June, the app is seeing an average of 73 responses per question asked. And users are spending nearly 3 hours in the app per month. The startup is also announcing a new version of its iOS app, which includes a new UI, and allows users to post questions via SMS, Twitter and Facebook. Localmind also offers a a mobile Q&A service.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily A survey of over 100 developers, previously posted here on Hacker News, aimed to determine which external APIs were the most difficult to integrate into developers’ projects. The winner…or rather, the loser? Facebook. Developers mentioned the Facebook API the most in terms having bugs, poor documentation, never-ending API changes, slow response times, and other headaches. The Google APIs were in second place, and the Twitter APIs came in third.  Image Source: Programmable Web Of course, these three services are also the most popular among today’s developers, so it’s not surprising to hear that they are the top of the list for problems as well. Certainly, Facebook, Google and Twitter will come in higher than, say, the Digg API, which is hardly ever seen in the wild these days. But it was Facebook that received the most complaints, with developers calling it “broken,” buggy and offering poor documentation. Twitter received complaints, too, but it also the most positive comments over any other service. Meanwhile, complaints about Google cited APIs that had been shut down or were missing. According to photo aggregation service Trove, which ran the survey, there were a large number of complaints about current API providers. And Trove thinks developers deserve better: They’re not serving their developers well. There’s bad documentation. There are problems with services like OAuth. APIs randomly change without warning. And there’s nothing even resembling industry standards, just best practices that everyone finds a way around. As developers, we build our livelihoods on these APIs, and we deserve better. Additional Data Other interesting results from the survey had to do with integrations, overhead, and details regarding specific headaches. For example, nearly two-thirds of developers claimed they had 3 or more service integrations, and a third said they used between 4 and 6. 9 developers reported they used 11 or more services.  Surprisingly, developers did not find that the maintenance for service integrations got worse year after year, which Trove had believed would be the case. This could be due to improvements over time like standardized and commiditized libraries, or possibly, Trove admitted, poor wording in their survey question. As for the  headaches? There were quite a few listed, including: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Foodspotting has emerged as a popular way to to share photos of your favorite foods and dishes with your friends. Today, Snapette is trying to take Foodspotting’s model and apply this to fashion. The startup, which is part of the 500 Startups accelerator program, is launching is a free iOS app that allows women to discover and share photos in-store products by location and recommendations.  You can snap photos of your favorite bag, top, shoes accessory, pair of jeans or other fashion item, choose your location, comment on where you found the product (i.e. what store), and post this to Snapette. And other users can browse products near their current location or by their favorite store, or brand.  Women can also see what items are trending globally, or by their specific location. And other users can comment on photos and share tips and recommendations. Each user has a “virtual closet” profile page that collects and showcases photos of items they’ve Snapped, Like and Want, and you can also post your ‘Snapettes’ on Facebook and Tumblr. In a separate section of the app titled Collections, Snapette features the boutiques in NYC, LA, SF and London. The startup has actually partnered with select retailer partners to provide Snapette users with an exclusive view of these stores’ current product offerings. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yelp provides a compelling platform for small businesses to connect with consumers via deals, reviews, reservations, information and more. But independent service professionals like hair stylists, bartenders, and DJs have a problem: if they jump from one establishment to another (which is quite common), they have a hard time taking their clientele with them. Enter Y Combinator-backed Opez, a platform that’s looking to help these professionals keep in touch with their clients on a long-term basis, making it easy to keep them informed of any job changes or hot deals they’re offering. Of course, Facebook already offers Facebook Pages, which can be used for similar a similar purpose. But Co-founder Chris Tam says service professionals want to be able to engage customers but also maintain a distance, which is the problem with using Facebook Pages as their centralized business page. Tam adds that this product is built specifically for professionals in certain industries, such as DJs, bartenders, models, hair stylists, personal trainers, cooks, and waiters. Service professionals can create a profile, upload photo galleries and videos, showcase work, create a vanity domain for their profile, and more. They can then encourage their customers to go to their Opez profile and follow them. Professionals can also post status updates and email their followers, but without either party seeing the other’s email address. So if a professional switches jobs, he can email his follower list, and keep people updated on where he is working next. He can also publish updates to Twitter and Facebook directly from Opez. On the customer side, anyone can see the profile of a professional on Opez, but in order to follow someone, you need to create a profile yourself. You can then post reviews on a professional’s page. The idea of Opez could be powerful because it gives service professionals a platform that blends the parts of Twitter, Facebook and Yelp — and it fits a clear need. The question at this point is whether it is different enough from Facebook Pages that industry professionals will be willing to create a profile on yet another new network. Initial results are encouraging: Tam says that the site is already seeing traction amongst bartenders, models, hair stylists and others. And he adds that a mobile app is in the pipeline.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In June Justin.tv launched TwitchTV, a live-streamed video game portal and community for gamers. It was an interesting move considering the video streaming company hadn’t really explored any verticals until then. But it looks like the startup’s move paid off. Twitch.TV is growing like gangbusters, and posted 8 million unique viewers worldwide in July.  Twitch.TV saw 1 billion minutes viewed in July, with traffic doubling. Of course, that’s a far cry from YouTube billions of daily views. But for a recently launched niche vertical, it’s still impressive.  For background, TwitchTV features competitions of a variety of games and platforms with top gamers, tournaments and commentary. The platform aims to be a one-stop-shop for live video for ‘eSports,’ which Justin.tv says is synonymous with competitive video gaming.  Twitch.TV aslo recently debuted a partner program for game developers and now has 500 total partners via the program.   The platform is also piggybacking on the massive success of Machinima, another online video gaming site which is seeing major traction amongst gamers.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily NuCaptcha, a startup that develops video captcha technology, is hoping to disrupt the captcha industry today with the launch of its dynamic captchas that promise security to website owners.  Captchas are security questions you find on Web sites that require you to decipher and type words or numbers and detects whether the user is a human or a spambot. Most Captchas you see are transcription, text-based Captchas.  Of course, captchas can often be confusing, and not user-friendly. NuCaptcha is trying to solve this pain point by offering site owners a more user-friendly alternative, called a video captcha.  NuCaptcha has spent the last few years optimizing its security so that 3 un-distorted letters can be used on “most” sites. Sites that need more security can add up to 8 letters.  NuCaptcha’s Behavioral Analysis System detects unusual behavior dynamically and can increase the complexity of the Captcha and slow down the video, making it difficult for both bots and human-farms to solve Captcha in high volumes.  A variety of video-based templates are available for site owners, based on their required site look-and-feel, and can be deployed quickly. Currently serving millions of Captchas per month, NuCaptcha offers a Free, Pro and Enterprise offering, and users can determine the size, choice of videos, security level, and even optional branding, advertising and revenue generation through NuCaptcha’s Advertising Programs.  NuCaptcha faces competition from ReCaptcha, which Google acquired  in 2009.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily More big money for online legal services. After LegalZoom raised $66 million from Kleiner Perkins And IVP, competitor Rocket Lawyer is also announcing a new round of funding. The startup has raised $18.5 million in funding led by August Capital with Google Ventures and Investor Growth Capital(IGC) participating in the round. This brings Rocket Lawyer’s total funding to $30 million.  Founded by lawyer Charles Moore, Rocket Lawyer not only provides legal documents to consumers and small businesses but also helps users that create customized legal documents that can be electronically signed online and shared instantly or downloaded for printing. Moore says that each month, more than 20,000 Last Wills and 40,000 Business Contracts are created. Rocket Lawyer offers these documents for free. While users can use Rocket Lawyer on a one-off basis, many of the site’s users pay for actual legal advice along with access to the documents. Users can pay as little as $20 for a single consultation to $200 to $300 per year for on call legal service, which is a fraction of what some lawyers cost (the company currently has thousands of people who pay for the yearly service).  Moore says that 20 million people will have used Rocket Lawyer by the end of this year. And visitors to Rocket Lawyer have grown over 100 percent, year over year. The company has been growing revenue by $10 million each year, but declined to reveal if Rocket Lawyer is profitable yet.  Considering the traction that other players like LegalZoom are seeing as well, it looks like the online legal services industry is a fast-growing market that continues to have major potential. And LegalZoom is looking at an IPO on the next year.  The new funds will be used to continue building Rocket Lawyer’s brand and patent-pending online legal solutions. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Launching officially to the public today is a new venture called MediaCore, brought to you by Damien Tanner and Stuart Bowness, the former of whom was responsible for Pusher, a solution that adds realtime tech to apps that was funded by the Heroku guys, among others, back in June.  Tanner and Bowness are launching MediaCore to provide any old small business with the ability to roll out their own YouTube, allowing the organizations to control that experience from end-to-end. In other words, MediaCore is a SaaS video publishing platform (complete with mobile apps) that provides any user or organization with the ability to create and control their own video site. And it’s all about good looks. As to how it works, customers upload content into the platform’s cloud-based infrastructure and let videos play through MediaCore’s player, which, among other things, automatically determines which browser the user is connecting with so that they don’t have to worry about differences between Flash and HTML5. The player sorts that out for you, using HTML5 whenever possible. Visitors can browse video collections through a cool visual guide, and the platform allows owners to easily organize their videos by category, or tag, and automatically sorts content by relevance and popularity. Users can add logos, backgrounds, and play with CSS to customize the appearance of the site. Plus, you can add your own domain, take advantage of podcasting, and quite a few other nifty tools. Considering the fact that creating a full-service video platform is no easy feat, MediaCore is offering a pretty cool white label solution that looks good and doesn’t require a lot technical know-how. MediaCore is currently offering a 15-day free trial, and after that, plans start at $99 a month. Those plans include custom domains, white label player, custom branding, automated encoding, social video embeds, etc. But the best part is that Android and iOS apps come with every account, while managing to look pretty damn good, too. Coming next? According to Tanner and Bowness, it’s private video, profiles, and paywalls.  To get the platform off and running, the startup is in the process of closing a seed round of angel funding from Andrew Wilkinson, the founder and CEO of MetaLab and Jesse Ma of Gawker Media. While the founders declined to give specifics, the round is likely in the hundreds of thousands. (Of dollars, that is.) When I asked them what the inspiration was for MediaCore, they told me that other video platforms out there are stacked with engineers and often pay little attention to design, resulting in crappy interfaces and a series of botched user experiences. So, after running an open source version of MediaCore for a year, they’re bringing their SaaS platform to market, in an attempt to lead with design first and make it easy to use. The beta version of the platform has already attracted over 1,100 companies, including London University, Mentor Graphics, TechVibes, Indiana University, and a variety of Fortune 500 companies. As one might guess from its early customers and the scalable cloud storage, the product is aimed at SMBs, but the founders told me that within the year they will be launching a series of personal plans that will be offered below the current $99-a-month pricing. MediaCore also plans to launch a Tumblr-like theme store in the near future, which will allow users to buy themes and customize their sites, all working via an API (a la Tumblr). All in all, when the paywalls roll out and a proper iPad interface drops, MediaCore is probably going to essentially be the video version of OnSwipe. Is that a good thing? You tell us. For more, check out MediaCore at home here or a front-end demo, click here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Since its inception, content on Twitter has largely been displayed in the same basic manner. That is a linear, reverse chronological stream of Tweets. Two new sections being added to the service are about to change that. Specifically, the “@Mentions” tab on twitter.com is being replaced by two new tabs: “@USERNAME” and “Activity”. These two streams will add an additional layer to Twitter and to Tweets themselves, a layer showing the social activity around them. The @USERNAME (obviously, USERNAME will be replaced by your Twitter name) stream will still show your @replies, but it will also show things like when someone follows you, when someone favorites one of your Tweets, when someone retweets one of your Tweets, or when someone adds you to a list. The Activity stream will show you all of those things, but related to all of the people you follow on Twitter. In other words, you can see if a connection has retweeted a Tweet, or if they followed someone new, etc. If you’re familiar with Instagram, this dual activity stream is similar to the concept they use to highlight happenings on the service beyond photos being shared in the main stream. All of this information flows into these two new Twitter streams in realtime. And the key is that you can do activities like reply, retweet, and most importantly for Twitter, follow, right from within these streams. That’s the key to this change: this is yet another move by Twitter to bulk up their social graph. And it’s a smart one because it will make Twitter feel more alive. At the same time, they’re keeping the main stream intact as the simple, standard reverse chronological stream. The mixing of @replies with other activity will probably piss some users off — most people hate change, after all — but overall it’s a smart move. This change could significantly alter Twitter usage in one other way as well. While Favoriting Tweets is just about as old as Twitter itself, it’s a feature that has always been under-represented and under-utilized. That’s because Twitter never gave it a defined purpose, and more importantly, never had a good way of showing how others were using it. Now they’re giving the feature the latter exposure. It seems that most people have used the Favorite button throughout the years to either bookmark something or to actually mark their favorite Tweets. This lead to the rise of services like Favstar. With the recent addition of Favorite email notifications, Favoriting finally gained some Twitter social juice. Now these new activity streams should jack up the usage of the Favorite as a way to show someone you appreciate their Tweet — a “like” button, if you will. Twitter will begin rolling out these changes to a very small set of users today. The rollout will continue over the next several weeks, assuming everything goes to plan. Again, this will only be on twitter.com for now — Twitter is thinking about how to surface this same information on their mobile applications, but notes that it could be different for different devices.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily During its grinding transition into the digital era, the publishing industry has been grasping at straws to find ways to evolve its revenue models. Even as time marches on, publishing companies by and large, continue to struggle with how to most effectively monetize their content and add supplementary (or even primary) revenue streams. JungleCents, the Mark Cuban-backed startup, is ushering men’s lifestyle magazine AskMen into the daily deals space in an attempt to help the publication take advantage of supplemental revenue streams — all thanks to vouchers.  As TC’s Alexia Tsotsis wrote back in October, a la Commission Junction, JungleCents is aiming to attack customer acquisition by accepting vouchers from companies in place of cash and running those deals on its site as well as affiliate sites — in a limited quantity for a limited time. In the case of AskMen, JungleCents is offering a discount on men’s merchandise from Bonobos, which is offered on JungleCents but also posted to AskMen.com. With the Bonobos deal, customers pay $48 for a $100 voucher to spend at Bonobos.com, with the deal essentially acting like a gift card, as the user doesn’t have to spend the $100 voucher all at once. Sure, AskMen isn’t exactly the New York Times, but daily deals can potentially allow content sites like AskMen to monetize in a more measurable approach, while adding more value to their readers, says JungleCents Co-founder and CEO Sameer Mehta. Sites like JungleCents can really be a boon for niche publishing sites, because they can serve more targeted deals that are relevant to a site’s readers. For example, if a reader is at AskMen, a men’s lifestyle publication and is served a deal for cheap jeans, the reader is more likely to click over than, say, someone perusing the news on the New York Times.  Those deals at the bottom of the post may even go so far as to add value to the content (gasp!), and give publishers a trigger to monetize. JungleCents has been testing this theory out with Complex, in which they offered readers 50 percent off Nooka watches. The deal netted Complex a 9 percent conversion rate, and the success gave JungleCents the motivation to begin pursuing other mid-sized niche publications.  Mehta says that he thinks this model is not only a benefit to publishers, but offers an upside to brands as well, as they are getting access to their target demographic. It also brings their customer acquisition costs down, because these customers (based on how they’re finding the deals) are not bargain-hungry coupon clippers, they’re the people more likely to be brand ambassadors. So, for brands that aren’t interested in Gilt or Groupon, the AskMen-Bonobos model seems a better fit.  As to how redeeming these vouchers works? After a consumer purchases a deal on JungleCents, they get an email with a unique redemption code, which they then use to check out and the brand’s web store. Mehta says that he thinks that this allows brands to own their new customer, unlike flash sales that run off last season’s product, where the consumer has no contact with the brand.  It’s an interesting model. Check it out and let us know what you think. See the deal here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last August, we reported that Noah Everett, the founder of Twitter photo sharing site Twitpic, has launched a new site, called Heello. The site wasn’t open to the public yet, but a year later, it looks like the curtains have finally been drawn on Heello. At first glance, it seems a lot like Twitter. You create a username, which is @’username’ and you can connect with Twitter and Facebook. You share what you are doing on the site with ‘Pings’ which is an 140 character update where you can attach a video, photo and/or your location. One noticeable difference in Heello is that it offers a continuous, auto-updated stream of updates so you don’t have to press update for more ‘pings’ to come in. Media is displayed within the stream. Users can @reply you, as they would on Twitter. If you want to retweet a ping, you can ‘echo’ it. You can also send private messages both to an individual and to groups of members. What’s odd about Heello is that it doesn’t really seem that original besides the continuous stream of updates, which actually gets annoying. And Heello certainly isn’t the first company to try to replicate Twitter (Yahoo Meme, Identica and Ekko are also playing in that space). Last year, when we asked Everett what Heello would be focused on, he told us that it would help people communicate better, ad offer internal tools and systems to businesses, including customer support/human resource tools and a technology platform. Clearly this version of Heello is quite different from that picture.  Of course, Everett could be just going after Twitter after the company launched its own TwitPic competitor recently. It’s no secret that TwitPic was completely blindsided by Twitter’s move into its territory. Back then, Everett was visibly annoyed by Twitter’s actions. So perhaps there’s some vengeance in this launch?  And there’s nothing wrong with throwing a little competition Twitter’s way, but it’s surprising that there isn’t much creativity in Heello. It’s also hard to imagine that TwitPic users will feel compelled to start using Heello because of the connection between Everett. Is Heello just one big F-you to Twitter?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’ve heard it once, you’ve heard it eleventy-four times. Mobile advertising is hot right now. U.S. mobile ad revenues, for example, are expected to hit $2.8 billion by 2015, says BIA/Kelsey, thanks largely to the the fact that 76.8 million Americans now own a smartphone.  This is all well and good, but the fact of the matter is that app developers still face a lot hurdles when it comes to marketing and monetizing their apps. With 81 percent of apps on iOS, for example, now being downloaded for free, many developers rely on mobile advertising and in-app purchases to monetize their apps. In concert with the growing market, mobile ad networks are now popping up fire and wide. One of the more notable networks being Google’s AdMob, but there are many younger competitors in the space, including a cool platform we covered yesterday, called Adlibrium. But who’s thinking about the developers? That’s what Israeli startup and mobile ad mediation platform inneractive is asking. Founded in 2007 (with offices now in Palo Alto), inneractive aims to help solve some of the friction developers encounter in monetizing their apps by giving them the tools to maximize revenue and serve targeted, relevant ads to their users that increase CTR, eCPM, and global fill rates. The startup is currently working with 100 ad partners in over 200 countries, including some of the big ad networks like AdMob, BuzzCity, and Jumptap, among others. With local agencies in these countries, inneractive hopes to ensure that a person in Italy, for example, will see Italian ads, and a person in Israel will see Hebrew ads, etc.  Essentially, inneractive integrates its 100 partner networks and ad agencies into one cross platform SDK so that enables developers to take advantage of relevant ads within their apps, which as a matter of course, tends to improve CTR and those other important mobile advertising stats. Inneractive runs campaigns and ads based on the location, platform, and content of the developer’s app, too, in order to provide the user with more targeted ads. According to inneractive Head of Marketing Hillel Fuld, the startup is currently seeing a 95 percent global fill rate, 99 percent in the U.S., click-through-rates as high as 3 percent, depending on the platform and app, and “triple the industry average” in eCPM (Android and WP7 is about $1.3 on average, with Ovi $2.5 on average), all of which has seen the startup’s revenue grow six-fold from 2010 to 2011. Of course, serving relevant ads means squat if developers can only use an ad optimization platform on one mobile OS. Today, inneractive is officially announcing the completion of its portfolio of SDKs. The coolest part about this for developers is that there’s only one line of code. So, in about 10 to 15 seconds (and I’ve seen this in action), a developer can have their app integrated with inneractive’s SDK. What’s more, these one-liners are available for Windows, iOS, Android, and BlackBerry. Inneractive also offers SDKs for Bada, J2mE, Symbian, and Flash, though without one-line implementation.  The Android SDK was the last piece of the puzzle, and it launches officially today. The company has been beta testing the Android SDK, and according to Fuld, the company has seen ad revenue, impressions, and clicks growing by about 30 percent over the past two weeks. Seeing as its free to use and revenue sharing for developers is 65 percent to 35 percent (with the 65 percent going to the developer), and the SDK implementation is a breeze, inneractive is offering a nifty little developer-friendly mobile platform that’s worth checking out. Interested parties can sign up and download the portfolio of SDKs here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I remember when I first wrote about Foodspotting a year and a half ago. At the time, nearly everyone I knew was using various social networks to share pictures of their food. Foodspotting was a service built around that very idea. That alone may have been enough, but the broader goal behind the photo-sharing was always food discovery. Today, the service has hit one million downloads of their food discovery applications. And to celebrate, they’re upping the social connections within the app with a new “Follow” tab. From here, you’ll be able to more quickly find and follow your friends (and food experts) who are also using Foodspotting. And you’ll also be able to follow specific foods and restaurants all in one stream. The ability to follow people, places, and foods has existed on Foodspotting’s website for a while, but the apps are the keys to the service. Foodspotting co-founder and CEO Alexa Andrzejewski says they noticed people weren’t just launching the app when they were hungry, they were launching it all throughout the day. Yes, the app now encourages more gluttony! Of course, Foodspotting has a different take on the update. “People don’t trust apps, people trust people. Our goal was never to create another social network or photo sharing app. Instead, we’ve designed Foodspotting’s social elements to support the food-finding experience,” Andrzejewski says. “When you visit a new city or walk into a restaurant, you can see what a friend — or the Travel Channel — recommended there. With a growing user base and these social features, our vision of a lens-like app that reveals interesting things around you is becoming more and more real each day,” she continues. Alongside a million downloads, Foodspotting now has over 720,000 reviews/photos on the service, we’re told. The latest version of the app (2.5) is now live in the App Store here. And in the Android Market here. Foodspotting notes that they’re also beta testing a BlackBerry app built with a partner. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Klout,  a startup that measures influence on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, YouTube, and most recently Foursquare, is adding more services today, totaling 10 different ways to measure your social influence on the web. Klout is adding five new networks—Blogger, Tumblr, Flickr, Instagram and Last.fm, allowing Klout users to add their influence on these networks to their Klout score.  For background, Klout evaluates users’ behavior with complex ranking algorithms and semantic analysis of content to measure the influence of individuals on social networks. On Twitter, Klout’s influence score is based on a user’s ability to drive action through Tweets, Retweets and more. On Facebook, Klout will examine how conversations and content generate interest and engagement, via likes, comments, and more, from the network’s nearly 700 million users. While Klout hasn’t given specifics on how these new services are factoring into your score, you can make assumptions based on each individual network. For LinkedIn, Klout could be evaluating your number of connections, and updated on the site. And presumably, your Foursquare Klout is based on how often you check in, how many mayorships you’ve earned, and more.  For Instagram, measurement could be how many likes you have on your pictures. Flickr could also use the same metric. Last.fm is an interesting addition, considering its the first music-based service that Klout has added. Perhaps a Spotify integration will come coon? Users can choose connect their accounts to their Klout score in their profile. Klout says that connecting an account wil never lower your score, but it may increase the score.  And not to be forgotten, Klout should be adding  Google+ as a measurement metric soon.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social commerce network Lockerz is opening its up the site to non-members. As you may know, Kleiner Perkins-backed Lockerz, which just raised another $36 million from Live Nation, Dag Ventures, Kleiner, and Liberty Media; revolves around the idea that influencers within a social network can become brand and content advocates and affect the behavior of their friends.  Lockerz is primarily targeted towards men and women ages 13 to 30, and is attempting to create a community of trendsetters and tastemakers who love to shop, play and connect on the Web. Users can earn points and discounts on brands by sharing content on the site. The company wants to be the go-to commerce homepage for teens and young adults. Now for the first time, Lockerz is open to non-members for exploration (users previously had to create a profile to peruse the site). Visitors can check out the company’s “Dealz” section, which includes thousands of special offers daily on everything from fashion brands, to restaurant and sporting events.   Customers are still required to join Lockerz in order to earn the network’s virtual currency PTZ, which can be redeemed for shopping discounts.  Lockerz members earn PTZ for nearly everything they do on the site, including logging in, uploading photos, viewing videos and buying merchandise.  Lockerz says it is seeing 45 million monthly unique visitors (according to Google Analytics), although comScore reports 13.5 million monthly unique visitors worldwide in June. But across all the data reports, Lockerz is growing in terms of visitors. Opening up the site is surely a way to increase traffic. The company also acquired photo sharing app Plixi as a way to boost photo sharing on its platform back in January. Lockerz also recently bought social sharing platform AddToAny last month. In addition to the opening up of the site, the Lockerz homepage has also gone through a redesign, and and the company has announced a partnership with EMI Music, in which videos of recording artists from record label’s library are available on Lockerz. Anyone can view the videos, but only members will earn PTZ for watching. Considering that Live Nation just joined Lockerz as an investor, it should be interesting to see if the network can build traction around sharing music (and perhaps replacing MySpace in that category?).   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – KidZui, a San Diego, California-based startup that offers a Web browser for kids, has debuted its latest product, a website called ZUI.com that allows kids to search and explore more than 5 million parent-approved websites, YouTube videos, games, images and whatnot. In addition, the fledgling company has announced that it has secured an additional $2 million in funding from VC firms like Mission Ventures, Maveron, Emergence Capital. KidZui is also backed by the Scholastic Corporation, a major publisher and distributor of children’s books and a provider of educational technology and e-commerce solutions. KidZui pitches ZUI.com as a ‘search and exploration engine for kids ranging from 3 to 12 years of age’, enabling kids to discover parent and teacher approved websites, videos, images and games, and also share their experience with their parents or other family members via Facebook. Available content is all over the place, and the site should look fairly nice on your mobile device’s browser as well. “Perhaps only in ZUI.com, through our suggested search terms – Justin Bieber is only a few clicks away from Mozart”, explains Cliff Boro, CEO and founder of KidZui. The site is free for parents and their kids, and is supported by brand advertising. And just to be clear, this is an extension of the KidZui browser, not a replacement.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cross-platform newsreader application News360 launched into version 2.0 today, a significant update that introduces its new personalization features. The news reader now learns from your activity on social Web services, including Facebook, Twitter, Google Reader and Evernote, in order to present you with stories that fit your interests. But unlike some of its competitors, which there are now many of, News360 uses semantic analysis to deliver the most relevant news of the day, including stories about your favorite topics from your favorite sources. Semantic Engine Learns from Your Actions The semantic underpinnings of the News360 app, which works on iPad, Android, Windows Phone, the PlayBook and now the Web, are a key differentiator for this application. Previously, the company leveraged those smart algorithms to surface the most important news in categories like World, U.S., Politics, Business, Tech, Crime, Sports, Arts, etc.  But now, that same technology is used to better personalize your own news reading experience. There are around 700,000 different entities known to the News360 semantic engine, and, explains News360 CEO Roman Karachinsky, each person typically has 5 to 10 “persistent” interests. These interests are automatically discovered for you by the app, after delving into your social Web activity. To determine what these interests are, the app doesn’t just pull from one network, or one dataset, like your “likes” on Facebook, or your Twitter “favorites,” for example – it looks at everything…given permission, of course. In addition to Facebook likes, the app reads your Facebook profile data, sees what you comment and share and examines how you interact with content. On Twitter, it looks at your bio, your lists, your tweets and your favorites. On Google Reader, it knows what you share, what you star, what you read and what clicked through to. And on Evernote, it looks at which web clips you saved, especially those that are news-related.  Beyond Personalization – News360 Does Aggregation, Too Personalization isn’t News360’s only trick, it’s just the newest one. The app’s name derives from its main selling point: a “360-degree” view of the news. What that means is that News360 presents you with aggregated coverage of the news from multiple news outlets, allowing you to move from one story to another for well-rounded understanding of the topic being reported. It also lets you browse the news via photos, which is still more palor trick than practical. As a voracious consumer of information, however, the “360degree” feature has a certain appeal for me – despite its current implementation. It’s not that using the “360degree” view in the app is hard, it’s just that I’m not all that impressed with the design. When up against powerhouse news readers like Flipboard, for example, which has to be one of the most elegant news-reading experiences to have ever emerged on iPad, there needs to be just as much focus on the front-end design as on the geeky data-crunching bots behind the scenes, I feel.  Above: What is that font?!  Besides, Flipboard has been steadily implementing the technology it acquired from a semantic startup known as Ellerdale to improve its own personalization and overall “smartnesss.” And Flipboard Co-Founder Mike McCue told me recently that a major personalization upgrade was coming to the app soon. With that in mind, it may not come down to a choice between data (News360) and design (Flipboard) at all, it may be a choice between data…or data and design. And in that battle, I’m not convinced News360 could win. Latest headlines delivered to you daily While tech company IPOs have captured buzz of late, it looks like M&A activity in the sector has been booming. According to an Ernst & Young report, big deals drove the aggregate value of global technology M&A to $52.1 billion in the second quarter of 2011, nearly doubling the deal value from the first quarter (up 92 percent to be exact).  Ernst & Young said that the surge was attributed mainly to industry consolidation and by ongoing innovations in areas such as cloud computing, smart mobility, internet and mobile video, the smart grid and solar energy. Overall, deal volume for the quarter increased 24% year-over-year (YOY) to 777 deals, but declined 2% sequentially from 794 deals in 1Q 2011. It was the first sequential quarterly decline since 1Q 2009.  This past quarter’s M&A value was 69% higher than the same quarter in 2010, when M&A deals were valued at $30.8 billion. The average value for deals in Q2 with disclosed-values rose to $194 million, which is the highest quarterly average since the first quarter of 2000, during the dot-com boom. Q2 2011 also includes the 20th-largest global technology deal ever by dollar value (perhaps the $8.5 billion cash acquisition of Skype by Microsoft?).  The report also shows that although 61% of all disclosed value was concentrated in the top 10 deals, the tech industry also saw significant deal-making strength in deals of less than $100 million.   Microsoft-Skype was the largest deal in the quarter, followed by Texas Instrument’s $6.5 billion acquisition of National Semiconductor. Other big-ticket deals for the quarter included Applied Materials $4.6 billion acquisition of Varian Semiconductor and Toshiba’s $2.3 billion buy of Landis.  In particular, Semiconductor M&A brought in $10.9 billion in the quarter and cloud computing and SaaS companies continued to drive both large and small deals. For example Century Link bought Savvis for $2.3 billion in the quarter.  More companies are also looking outside their own countries for acquisitions. Ernst & Young’s data shows that ‘cross-border’ deal volume in 2Q 2011 was 16% higher sequentially, compared with an 11% decline in ‘in-border’ deals. The report suggests that increasing globalization and the growing volume of “overseas” cash stockpiled by US-based companies may be behind the increase in CB deal-making as the US acquired 56% of all CB value acquired. Some of the other larger M&A deals in the second quarter include EA’s $1.3 billion purchase of PopCap games, Providence Equity’s $1.6 billion acquisition of BlackBoard, Epicor and Activant’s nearly $2 billion deal, and Level 3’s $3 billion acquisition of Global Crossing.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily NoSQL database company Couchbase, created earlier this year through the merger of CouchOne (co-founded by the creator of CouchDB) and Membase (founded by the key developers behind memcached), has scored $14 million in a Series C round of funding. The financing round was led by Ignition Partners with participation from the company’s existing backers Accel Partners, Mayfield Fund, and North Bridge Venture Partners. In addition, the company says, Couchbase has also reserved an additional $1 million for investment from ‘strategic customers and partners’.  Couchbase offers database solutions for building Web and mobile applications. Just last week, the company released Couchbase Server 2.0, a distributed, document-oriented database management system and the company’s first integrated product release after the merger. Couchbase says it will use the new funding to accelerate the delivery of NoSQL database technologies, grow the company in the enterprise market, and expand internationally. The financing round brings the company’s total of capital raised to $30 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Tech Accelerator DreamIt Ventures is holding its Demo Day for its New York class of startups today. The 15 companies include students and alumni from top academic institutions like Harvard Business School, the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Yale University and Carnegie Mellon University. Several of the founders also have past work experience at companies including Yahoo, Microsoft, American Express, and McKinsey. This event is the first opportunity for media and investors to see the startups present their ideas. There will be 250 to 300 people, almost all investors, attending today’s presentation. DreamIt Ventures was founded in 2007 in Philadelphia, and ran its first class of startups in summer 2008. The firm provides common accelerator services, such as shared office space, a cash stipend for developers, a variety of donated services to help developers with legal and accounting issues, PR assistance, a speaker series with tips from investors, an advisory board consisting of early stage entrepreneurs, and, most importantly, one-on-one mentorship for the participating companies. After having received several hundred applications for inclusion in this year’s program, DreamIt narrowed down the applicants to just 15 startups. For the second year in a row, five of the companies were selected in partnership with Startl, the non-profit social enterprise dedicated to accelerating digital innovations for learning, from kindergarten to college, both in and out of the classroom. The full list of graduates is below. 1DocWay 1DocWay brings the doctor’s office online. Patients can interact with their doctor over a secure video chat platform offering increased access to clinical care, especially for the rural, elderly, disabled and busy. As a result, physicians receive additional revenue generating opportunities and scheduling flexibility. The platform is live and in a closed alpha with anchor clients using 1DocWay in varying clinical applications, including a $35 million psychiatric health system with 75 clinicians, 94 beds and 6 outpatients clinics. AfterSteps AfterSteps is an online end-of-life planning service that simplifies death preparation, just like TurboTax does for tax preparation. AfterSteps enables users to create a complete end-of-life plan, store it, and then transfer it to designated family members upon death, ensuring that they have this critical information when they need it most. AfterSteps was a finalist in StartUp2011, Silicon Valley Baby Boomer’s Conference, and Harvard Business School’s Business Plan Competition. It’s currently a finalist in MassChallenge. While at DreamIt, AfterSteps launched its initial version, acquired its first paying subscribers, signed its first distribution contract, and was featured in Forbes. AppAddictive AppAddictive utilizes “Apps” and “Ads” (Appvertizements) in a marketing platform for businesses to acquire customers through social media. It integrates content, ad campaigns, messaging and analytics into one platform so businesses can optimize connections, commerce and advertising in social media. By removing the multiple steps of advertising across different social networks, AppAddictive makes it easy for businesses to interact with their fans and make them buy. AppAddictive also makes it easy for businesses to acquire customers from user generated web content, a Facebook platform of social apps and ad network. They have paying clients and are currently generating ad revenues from millions of impressions per month. AppBrick AppBrick provides robust mobile solutions for content producers. BookBrick™ and StoryBrick™ empower authors and publishers to easily create, launch and manage powerful apps via an intuitive, web-based interface – no programming required. AppBrick-powered apps deliver a rich, social and engaging new reading experience to consumers across multiple platforms. At the same time, AppBrick provides smart analytics and introduces new direct marketing and sales channels to authors and publishers. It also provides a new way for authors and publishers to reach and connect with their audience. BookBrick™ enhances digital books with rich-media, productivity tools and social features, while StoryBrick™ easily converts digital children books into an interactive, customizable storyboard. Clothes Horse Clothes Horse is a platform that enables consumers to shop for clothing across retailers with a single user profile. It’s like a Facebook Connect for fashion, they say. Their first product is a Saas solution that retailers plug into their website which recommends the best fitting clothes based on a shopper’s body size and favorite past purchases. As users provide more information about their wardrobe in each shopping experience, a Fashion Graph is created that connects users, brands, and clothes. Retailers want this because it tackles their top friction points today: successfully turning shoppers into customers and minimizing returns. The company is currently working with brands both large and small who have signed up for DreamIt’s Charter Partner Program. Cognection Cognection commercialized three decades of research in consumer psychology and behavioral economics, similar to Dan Ariely’s work in the book Predictably Irrational, to generate a new type of product recommendation engine that makes the online retail experience more meaningful for consumers and more profitable for retailers. Recommendations combine the most important product attributes with implicit user preference data to enhance the customer experience with easier choice justification. Conceptually, Cognection focuses on the following: “Given what we know about your preferences, here are the best products for you. Now let’s get you there faster and construct product comparisons that make those products even more attractive.” The company identifies, quantifies,and fixes human irrationality, it says, “to nudge consumers to direct customers through the conversion funnel in a manner optimized for better choices that end frustration in e-commerce.” Hoot.Me Hoot.Me is a Facebook application that allows students to switch Facebook into study mode. With Hoot, students are able to see what their friends are working on and collaborate inside of Facebook. For example, if a student is working on calculus homework, Hoot lets the student see in real-time all of his or her friends working on calculus. He or she can then browse through old study sessions or create a new session to collaborate from within Facebook using group video conferencing, screen sharing, and smart chat (which allows typed math equations to be automatically reformatted to look the way they would in a textbook). If friends are not available or can not answer the question, Hoot enables tutors to connect with those who need their help via an affordable transaction fee. KeepIdeas KeepIdeas helps consumers organize and collaborate on decisions in the cloud. It’s a social “Evernote for verticals.” Engaged members are already keeping 30,000 ideas -including recipes, hotels, couches, homes, and more. Growing by focusing on vertical markets, partners of its primary product, KeepRecipes, range from Iron Chef Masaharu Morimoto to iVillage, with “more exciting announcements on the way.” The platform will eventually expand to KeepTravel, KeepDecor, KeepHomes, and more. LearnBop Learning one-on-one from an individual tutor has been shown to increase a student’s performance by an entire letter grade. Unfortunately, it is economically impossible for every student to have their own personal tutor. Until now. LearnBop’s authoring tool enables tutors to create interactive math and science problems online that respond to and learn from a student’s incorrect responses with real-time clues, as a tutor would in a one-on-one scenario. Using LearnBop’sproprietary platform, college students have reduced the amount of time it takes to create such lessons for the calculus curriculum from 12 months to 2 months. Some LearnBop lessons are open sourced and can be modified for local use, while premium lessons are available for sale in LearnBop’s online marketplace. Clients include Carnegie Mellon University and CUNY and many others are currently in beta. LetsGiftIt Let’s Gift It is a platform for social gifting. It gives online retailers a plug-in tool which allows multiple contributions towards high ticket items on their registry,wish-list and product pages. By socializing the buying experience for high ticket/high margin products, the company helps online retailers generate incremental revenue and increase average order value while helping gift givers collaborate on high-end gifts. Pandaly Pandaly creates interactive games that provide users a better way to discover, rate, and share discounts with friends. Through these experiences, Pandaly collects information on individual preferences which it uses to recommend the most relevant deals to each consumer. Pandaly recently released its first experience, The Daily Deal Showdown, in which users are presented two deals and asked to choose their favorite. Other games are due this fall. Re-Vinyl Re-Vinyl is a mobile application that connects musicians and related brands to their fans to increase fan engagement and revenue opportunities for the band and brands. Within this context, Re-Vinyl provides a number of services for the bands and their fans. Among other features, it provides a platform where musicians and related brands can tell and sell their story on their terms and which includes atoolkit where fans can collaboratively remix, respond, and purchase musical content. TakeTheInterview Take The Interview is a cloud-based video interviewing platform for employers and candidates. As an employer, you know in the first few minutes of meeting someone if that candidate is not a fit for your organization. Many interviewers waste valuable time and resources interviewing candidates that could be screened prior to the in-person interview. Take The Interview provides a time-saving filter between the resume review and the in-person interview, by offering asynchronous (not-live), under-5-minute interviews that employers can control and review at their convenience. Take The Interview launched during the summer and already has over 80 beta customers. Pictour.us Pictour offers a marketplace for photo tours that you can use whenever you travel to a new city or even to discover new things to do in the city in which you live.  Pictour allows anyone to create and publish photo tours that are displayed on an engaging interactive map that can be easily browsed on the web, a smartphone, or downloaded for offline use right in the traveler’s pocket. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Daily deals juggernaut Groupon managed to significantly slash marketing costs last quarter, but its net loss in the second quarter of this year has almost tripled compared to last year as it hired more than 1,000 new employees, according to an SEC filing published this morning. Basically, the company is still growing like gangbusters but losing money like crazy in the process. The updated financial details show that Groupon increased revenue from $3.3 million in Q2 2009 to $878 million in the second quarter of 2011, while net income swung from $21,000 for the second quarter of 2009 to a staggering net loss of $102.7 million for the second quarter of 2011.  The reported net loss is in line with the first quarter of 2011 but nearly triple the $36 million loss from Q2 2010. Groupon hired more than 1,000 employees in the 3-month period – growing its sales force to more than 4,800 people – which caused a serious bump in ‘general and administrative expenses’.  In total, Groupon grew from 37 employees as of June 2009 to 9,625 employees as of June 2011. Groupon serves 175 North American markets and 45 countries as of June 30, 2011. The company accounted for 115.7 million subscribers at the end of the second quarter of 2011 and says over 23 million customers have purchased Groupons through the end of Q2 2011. Marketing costs dropped to a little over to $170 million in Q2 2011, whereas Groupon spent $208 million on marketing during the first quarter of 2011.  Interestingly, the company removed its controversial revenue calculation of gross revenues. As expected, the company stopped referring to a measurement called Adjusted Consolidated Segment Operating Income (ACSOI), a metric that excludes marketing costs as well as stock-based compensation and acquisition-related items. We’re still going over the rest of the amended filing – there may be more updates. Two months ago, Groupon filed an S-1 to IPO, looking to raise at least $750 million. Story to be continued, obviously. Also read: Groupon Releases New S-1, Adds 11 Underwriters Including JP Morgan And Allen & Co. Why Groupon Is Poised For Collapse Groupon Responds To IPO Backlash With A Cheeky Feline Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKno QuizMe and Journal Demo“We are not trying to redefine the textbook,” Kno CEO Osman Rashid tells me, “we are trying to redefine how you learn.” Today, Kno is taking a big steps towards making digital textbooks more social by making 100,000 college textbooks available both on its Website and on Facebook. The Textbooks for Facebook app and site will present the books via an HTML5 reader. So students who buy a book via Kno’s iPad app, can now read them online or on Facebook. They can post study questions and comments to their news feeds, with an eye towards creating full-fledged study groups down the line. Kno is also adding new study features into its iPad app. In the video above, VP of marketing Ousama Haffar demos QuizMe and Journal. QuizMe creates a test out of any labeled diagram in a digital textbook. It blacks out the labels and lets you test yourself with multiple choice answers, which works well with biology or anatomy diagrams. The Journal is a digital notebook in the form of an activity stream. Kno’s iPad app already lets students take notes or highlight passages. Now it collects all of those notes in the Journal, which organizes all the notes for each textbook into an Evernote-like stream of notes. The notes can include highlights, text notes, textbook images, audio notes, and even photos taken with the iPad. “You will use the journal to prepare for an exam, not the book,” predicts Rashid. And while the Journal will be a collection of private notes at launch, Rashid suggests that eventually students will be able to share their Journals with friends. It is not too hard to imagine how the stream of notes in the Journal could become the basis for a study group stream in the Facebook app at some point down the line. The complicated part will be navigating all the different DRM requirements from all the various textbook publishers, but Rashid believes that the industry will come to a consensus around how much of a textbook can be freely shared. (AFter all, it’s free marketing). It was only last April when Kno finally gave up on its own tablet and embraced the iPad instead. The app has been well-received, with an average of four stars in iTunes across 205 ratings and only 3 percent of Kno’s digital textbooks have been returned (the service honors a 15-day return policy for purchased books). Speaking with Rashid, he seems almost liberated. Focussing on software only certainly appears to be accelerating the pace of new feature introductions. Latest headlines delivered to you daily As you probably know, I hate email. But I love Sparrow. And I love Shortmail. The two services are attempting to alleviate the pain that is email is two different ways. Sparrow makes email pretty. Shortmail makes email short. Today, the two are teaming up. The latest version of Sparrow (1.3.2) which has just gone live in the Mac App Store now includes support for Shortmail. It needs to be set up through the Preferences -> Accounts area, but it’s pretty straight-forward. Essentially, it’s just an IMAP connection through the Sparrow client, but it comes with a nice little bonus: a character counter. The entire idea behind Shortmail is that emails are far too long, and should be limited in a Twitter-like fashion. But instead of 140 characters, Shortmail gives users 500 characters to send email messages. If you connect a Shortmail account to Sparrow, it will now honor that character count limit, and show you how many characters each message is as you type. This goes along with 410 Labs’ (Shortmail’s parent company) proposal that a new header should be added to email which displays character count limits (if they exist). Sparrow is the first to get on board with that. Hopefully others will too — *cough* Gmail *cough*. I guess it’s a more reasonable solution than my hope that email just dies entirely. The new Sparrow comes with a range of other new features, tweaks, and bug fixes. You can find it here. And you can find Shortmail here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this year, mobile social gaming platform OpenFeint teamed up with one of its investors, Chinese gaming company The9 to bring game developers to the Android platform. OpenFeint and The9 announced that it will be using te $100 million Fund9, a Chinese-based mobile internet development fund, to fund game developers using OpenFeint platform for Chinese games.  In just three months of operation, The9’s branded version of OpenFeint, Game Zone, is already distributing 60 live games across 30 app stores in China. OpenFeint and The9 also announced that they have selected the first five recipients of funding from their Android Porting initiative. With this funding, developers will be able to port these popular iOS games to Android and sell them globally. The9 will then localize them and publish the games for the China market.  The games were chosen based on their quality, number of downloads, and game developer’s ability. Selected games include: Pix’n Love Rush by BulkyPix, Shift!2 by Fishing Cactus, iSlash by Deullo Games, Mini Motor Racing by Binary Mill, and Babel Rising by BulkyPix. OpenFeint isn’t the only company to try to cash in on the major potential of the Chinese gaming market. Zynga has also furthered its presence in China with a new partnership with Chinese internet giant Tencent, launching a beta version of Zynga City, a new localized Chinese version of CityVille. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SinglePlatform, a startup that helps local businesses create websites in minutes, has raised $3.25 million funding led by DFJ Gotham Ventures with participation from New World Ventures, First Round Capital and RRE Ventures. This investment brings the company’s total funding to $4.45 million.  SinglePlatform operates as a ‘one-stop’ platform for local businesses to manage their web presence, allowing them to integrate their websites, Twitter, Facebook and more easily. Local businesses are also able to publish their specials, events, menus, photos and more. Plus, SinglePlatform’s website creation tool automatically creates a mobile-optimized site. Another bonus to using SinglePlatform is that businesses can publish their listings across a publisher network that includes 11,000 mobile applications, 34,000 hotels, 620 universities, data providers, and travel and food specific destination sites. As more local businesses need a presence online and on mobile phones, an easy to use offering like SinglePlatform is sure to be popular. Currently,  thousands of restaurants across hundreds of markets are using SinglePlatform to manage their digital presence. This is actually a market where Google is also trying to gain business. The search giant is actively encouraging businesses to create both a mobile and web site to create a digital presence.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new startup called Pago is launching today, and if you live in Mountain View your life may have just gotten a lot easier. You can now go to more than 50 local merchants– coffee shops, dry cleaners, bars and the like– and order what you want from your smartphone, pay for it, and then skip the regular line to get it. It aims to bring Web-efficient check outs to the real world. Clearly anyone who spends their day chronically late (like me) would love this. There are two potential problems. The first is that founder and CEO Leo Rocco may have taken that whole adage of building the company you’d like to see in the world a little too literally. He lives in Mountain View and today his routine will get a good deal easier. But what are the odds Pago lasts long enough to sign up my favorite coffee shop, dry cleaner, and ice cream shop? Or yours? Saying you are going to follow people through their day seems an almost impossible claim to deliver on given how different each of our daily routines are. The other issue is that Pago is positioning itself as a payment platform first and foremost, and that’s one crowded space. Is Pago clever but just too late to the local party? A place in my neighborhood that could desparately use something like this is trendy ice cream shop Humphry Slocombe. There’s a line halfway down the block most days, usually the result of people trying different flavors at the front of the line and agonizing over which one to get. A system for quickly serving customers who already know what they want seems a win-win for the store and its patrons. But Humphry Slocombe already uses Square as its main payment system. Is it likely to adopt another smartphone-based payment platform? Of course not. Like games that leverage Facebook’s existing social graph, Pago might be a stronger offering along with a payment system already gaining traction in the market than as a new payment competitor. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve always heard that stores and retailers are willing to barter with customers on pricing, including many chains, but I never have the courage to actually haggle with salespeople. To be honest, I love the discounts but am really bad at haggling for a price. Now, with the launch of oBaz, I can simple get the new service to do all my haggling for me. Chicago-based oBaz is announcing that Lightbank, the venture firm founded by Groupon co-founders Eric Lefkofsky and Brad Keywell, has backed the startup. The amount of the investment was not disclosed. oBaz, short for online bazaar, lets anyone create their own group of like-minded buyers looking to get a good price on the same product or service. You simply post the item you’d like on oBaz, wait for people to join the group (a minimum of 25 people have to be in a group to haggle for a product), and then let oBaz work its magic. oBaz hagglers will reach out to merchants or manufacturers and leverage the group and their own negotiating expertise to get the best possible deal. The larger the group, the more leverage the oBaz haggling team has. Users can build up the group by sharing it with Facebook, Twitter and e-mail. Each group has seven days to build to a critical mass Once a deal is haggled the group is closed to the public and the group members are emailed access to the offer. However, group members are under no obligation to buy if they’re not happy with the deal. Deals are redeemed directly on merchants’ websites or in-store using promotional codes or printed coupons. Of course, you may be wondering if this actually works. But in the company’s soft launch, members were able to get pretty decent deals on products. Recent group deals on oBaz include: $300 off a Nikon camera kit that normally retails for $900; $130 Ray-Ban Wayfarer sunglasses for just $80, $120 off a BOB Stroller; 50 percent off an online GMAT course; a free $45 coin purse when buying a Longchamp Tote; and a lacrosse stick that retails for $105 sold through oBaz for $30. Founders Brian Ficho and Greg Caplan are former employees of Lightbank. Ficho tells us that the beauty of oBaz is that it is location-agnostic, so people don’t need to be based in a certain area to get a deal. Personally, I would use oBaz. As I mentioned above, I don’t have great haggling skills, but I do enjoy a discount (who doesn’t). Outsourcing this action seems to be the best option. If oBaz can get a critical mass of people to start interacting with the site, it could really take off. personally, I have my eye on a pair of Bose noise canceling headphones. Anyone else? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Camber Tech, an advertising and social media startup founded in 2008, is officially revealing today that it has raised $1.5 million in seed capital from a host of international angel investors. The startup plans to use its recent infusion of capital to ramp up marketing efforts and continue cross-platform development of its mobile apps.  In early 2010, shortly after the devastating earthquake in Haiti, Camber Tech was invited to the Clinton Global Initiative, as the startup was at the time working on creating local web platforms in an effort to enhance access to commerce, journalism and media in conflict zones. Yet, because of local friction, both in language and business customs, the plan was dropped.  However, inspired by the incident, the startup remained determined to continue working on a realtime cause marketing solution that could have real global application, and help solve some big problems for local commerce along the way. After a few months of work, Camber Tech announced new a commitment with Former President Clinton to “help raise funds and awareness for non-profits and social causes through its mobile advertising platform over a six year period”.  So, with this new funding and a partnership with the Clinton Global Initiative in its pocket, Camber Tech has developed Adlibrium, a local mobile ad and marketing platform that runs on mobile devices — well, initially for free only on Android, with iOS coming in the near future, according to Camber Tech Co-founder and CEO Shaunak Khire. Essentially the platform, which launches in private beta today, enables small, local businesses and merchants to easily and efficiently create ad and marketing campaigns, offer promotions, deals, and more. Adlibrium wants to encourage these SMBs, that may traditionally struggle to bring offline business online, to get all digital and start connecting and interacting with their customers via a critical access point: their ever-present mobile devices.  Through Adlibrium, merchants and local businesses can create fixed price and time-sensitive local offers and ad campaigns, so in a sense — for those familiar with the space — Adlibrium is a local commerce platform (in app form) that, at its core is a little bit of AdWords and instant offers, with a hint of Lockerz.  Except that, in the case of Adlibrium, one of the nifty features of its ad platform is that it offers businesses the ability to view analytics (like views, calls, location, purchases) and then take that data and use it for re-targeting — right up to the individual impression. Adlibrium enables transactions and verification by allowing merchants to punch in an ID, similar in conceit to GrouponNow, with the main difference being that Adlibrium takes no commissions.  By allowing customers to see an ad, make a purchase on a deal or offer based on that ad, and then allow merchants to track and analyze the data being produced by these interactions (to then allow future retargeting), Adlibrium is making a play at closing the redemption loop, an important goal for local commerce, which my colleague Erick Schonfeld recently wrote about in detail. What’s more, the platform gives merchants the opportunity to serve three different types of ads or promotions to their customers: General ads (which are text-only); offers; and exclusive offers, which come in the form of, “own this location for a certain period of time”, for example. And distribution of these ads is totally opt-in for customers, which is a nice touch in that it allows customers some control.  For Adlibrium, the goal, then, is not only to offer campaigns that can be controlled in every aspect, be it gender, category, or location, but to work towards closing the redemption loop by allowing merchants to automatically enter customer data into their databases, thus allowing them easy future retargeting through loyalty cards, individual offers, etc. The other cool feature that helps it go for the close: For every offer a user opts-into, they are rewarded with Adlibrium coins, which can then be redeemed at specific merchants or can be donated to a cause of their choice, so that users have actual cash incentive to donate the virtual currency in a philanthropic way. This is obviously where the startup’s commitment with the Clinton Global Initiative enters into play, as it not only allows donation of virtual currency, but also gives non-profits a space within the merchant ad unit — if the merchant chooses to associate with a particular cause, of course. But, according to Shaunak, the merchants the team has spoken to thus far are excited about the opportunity to partner with non-profits, especially as they’re creating “cause-aware ads”, which make everyone involved feel a little bit better about online advertising. Yet ads, coupons, and offers are just the first step for Adlibrium, Shaunak says. The next phase will be to roll out an app that targets advertising and marketing agencies, allowing them to take advantage of the same features available to merchants for their own brands, naturally spreading the reach of Adlibrium’s platform. But how will the startup monetize its platform, you ask? Because Adlibrium operates on a DIY model, merchants and local businesses download the free app and, similar to Admob, set up an account balance of $10, $50, or $100, which then allows the business to create one of the three types of aforementioned ad campaigns. Adlibrium then charges merchants depending upon the level of targeting and campaign duration they choose. The offers and ads vary from $20 to $1,000, again depending on run-time and targeting. While there are some fees, Adlibrium has established an interesting model that should be of interest to those local merchants that are wary of the Groupon model’s efficacy in retaining customers after the expiration of an offer or coupon. Because Adlibrium doesn’t charge commission, and provides businesses with sales and analytics metrics, they facilitate easier retargeting and (the hope is) greater retention than services like GrouponNow or LivingSocial Instant. Camber Tech also recently joined the Mobile Marketing Association, a non-profit entity that represents more than 700 companies in the mobile marketing space. What’s more, Shaunak, at 21, became the youngest member of the MMA’s global board of directors. Not too bad for a 21-year-old. Having received support from President Clinton and his global initiative, and with the promise of incentives to donate to non-profits and charities baked into the Adlibrium platform, the startup seems well positioned to become a player in the space. Though we’ll have to wait for the iOS apps before we jump to any major conclusions, of course.  For those readers looking to get an early taste of Adlibrium’s beta launch for merchants, click here and enter your email into the “early access” prompt. And for more info on Adlibrium, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily SAY Media, the company that was formed after the merger between VideoEgg and Six Apart, this morning announced its acquisition of Remodelista, a home interiors website targeting home owners and design enthusiasts. It’s the third acquisition for SAY Media this year, after the digital media company picked up Dogster and digital agency Sideshow. Remodelista editorial team is led by Julie Carlson and reaches many a interior designer, shelter magazine writer, architect and home design blogger. SAY Media says it will maintain the Remodelista brand. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily CapLinked, the LinkedIn-meets-SalesForce for private investing, has landed a significant deal today, helping Microsoft BizSpark startups raise cash via a new capital raising tool. As we’ve written in the past, CapLinked launched to allow entrepreneurs to raise capital and sell or buy assets, manage and contact investor prospects, centralize document flow on a secure platform and connect with new investors, advisors and companies. Investors can use CapLinked to manage deals, build public profiles, leverage LinkedIn contacts and connect with promising startups. Startups enrolled in the Microsoft BizSpark program will have exclusive access to new feature Deal Rocket, which allows them to submit their ‘deal room’ to dozens of angel groups and early stage venture capital funds around the country.  Here’s how Deal Rocket works. Companies can create secure, viral deal rooms on CapLinked to manage their capital raise or asset sale. The deals can then be shared with prospective investors and advisors, who can then invite others to view the deal. And companies can submit their deal to over 100 angel groups and venture capitalists pre-aggregated into Deal Rocket for review. As you may know, BizSpark is a Microsoft startup accelerator program that provides fledgling companies with resources such as access to Microsoft software development tools, free or discounted software or cloud services, as well as access to the software giant’s broad partner network and as much marketing visibility as they can give them. For background, CapLinked was founded by former PayPal marketing exec Eric Jackson and funded by a number of well known members of the PayPal mafia. Jackson says over 55,000 individuals and 6,000 companies are currently using the site to manage the private investing process and share $5 billion worth of deals.  For now, Deal Rocket is only available only to BizSpark startups, and will soon be available to other CapLinked users in the future. It’s a actually a pretty significant deal for CapLinked considering that there are over 45,000 startups in the CapLinked program. And having Microsoft as a partner isn’t to shabby either.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily With Groupon on the verge of going public, and Google, Facebook, and just about everyone else rushing to copy the idea, there’s no question that the model has been a huge hit with consumers. But there are still some questions as to just how much it helps out the businesses offering the deals. It’s essentially a loss leader model, so the success metrics can be tricky to accurately gauge. Bloomspot has a take on this model based around success — for both merchants and customers. And investors are buying into it big time — to the tune of a fresh $40 million in funding. To be clear, Bloomspot does not orient themselves around group deals. Instead, they focus on offers from high-quality merchants looking to connect with their best customers. Said another way, they’re not looking to send deals to the masses, they’re looking to connect certain vendors with (hopefully) loyal consumers. The offers they serve are more highly tailored for specific interests and demographics. And again, they believe they’ve now nailed the model that will work. “We’ve closed the loop on the business model,” Jasper Malcomson, Bloomspot’s CEO and co-founder, tells us. The key, is data. Bloomspot gets permission from both their users and vendors to look at and analyze the credit card data used at places where Bloomspot is running an offer. This allows them to see not only that an offer was used, but how it did in terms of helping the vendor sell other products to the customer. Yes, they’re looking to see if the “loss leader” is actually a “loss leader”, or really just a “loss”. They then present this data back to the vendors in a fully transparent way. (Here’s a sample of what that data looks like, obviously anonymized so it could be made into a sample.) But here’s the real key: Bloomspot uses this data to predict how much a customer is going to spend with a merchant based on the offer. And they guarantee a certain level of profitable spend. If the offer doesn’t lead to that, Bloomspot makes up the difference from their own commission. In other words, the vendor really can’t lose. Bloomspot is comfortable enough in their model to do this (as well as make the data fully transparent). They’ve been running their specific high-quality offers for months now, so they have the data to back all of this up as well. They believe they’ll be able to accurate predict how much additional spending an offer will send to a vendor. Okay, but why would a customer go along with this — the use of their credit card data? Because Bloomspot offers them a number of rewards for participation. First of all, if you buy a Bloomspot offer then use the same credit card with the merchant, Bloomspot will give you 25 percent back on your next offer purchase. Second, the continued use of the same credit card essentially turns it into a loyalty card for you. This helps Bloomspot show certain vendors that you’re a “great patron” that should get a special offer, beyond the ones offered to the public. “All of this is most powerful when it’s not just about savings,” Malcomson says. “It’s a recognition system. In a way, it’s less about discounts and savings, and more about recognition and status,” he says, noting that places like Las Vegas have been doing this for decades now. If you spend a lot of money gambling, a casino will comp other things for you. “In many ways, that’s exactly what we do,” he says. Obviously, this kind of model would not work for all businesses. But it makes sense for higher-quality ones — mainly in the restaurant, spa, and resort hotel space. “We believe this is about the quality of your customers,” Malcomson says. As mentioned, the company has just closed their Series B round of funding. The $35 million round was co-led by InterWest Partners and Columbia Capital. Also participating are Menlo Ventures, True Ventures, QED Investors, Harrison Metal, and individuals such as Erik Blachford (former CEO of Expedia) and Gary Parsons ( former Chairman of Sirius XM Radio). Additionally, Bloomspot closed another $5 million round of venture debt from Western Technology Investment. This gives them a robust $40 million in new capital to work with and to prove this new model works. They had previously raised around $11 million, including a $9 million Series A last September. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When it comes to file sharing, there is no shortage of tools and services to help you transfer your files, big and small. There’s the old tried and true approach on email, or using VOIP services like Skype, or cloud-based services like Dropbox and Box.net, or the browser-based Ge.tt, to veterans like WeTransfer and YouSendIt. Then there’s newcomer, the social and sharing-focused Minus, which recently scored $1 million in funding and Sendoid, whose launch we covered back in March. The list is long, but new sites continue popping up, because no single business has a stranglehold on the market, and each method of file sharing has its drawbacks — and its limits. A new startup launching in beta today, incubated in the most recent summer batch of Y Combinator companies, called Kicksend, aims to make it even easier to send and share large files, especially with one’s non-technical friends and family members. There are plenty of file sharing services available, but many of them are confusing to use or have needlessly complicated UIs, are expensive, or come with too much fine print. Even Dropbox, though it’s relatively easy to use, requires an installation process — which may be too involved if you just want to send a few files. Email is great for small files, but with Gmail’s capacity restriction at 25 megabytes, for example, one needs to go elsewhere to send larger files. And sending via IM and Skype is synchronous, meaning that you need the other person to be online in order to accept the transfer. So Kicksend is trying to offer a better way that lets users automatically receive and download files, even if they’re not there to push the “accept file” button. For now, there are two ways to use Kicksend: Through a web and desktop app. (Mobile, the important third piece to the puzzle, is on its way and should be available soon.) Users can sign up for an account or just login with their Facebook account to view which of their friends and family are already using Kicksend. Once a user is logged in, they follow a simple three-step process to send the files. Simply drag and drop the files (of any size) into the interface/prompt on Kicksend’s homepage and select the recipients, (the recipients need only an email address, they don’t have to be Kicksend users), and, then, press send. Fairly straightforward, methinks. Kicksend also makes it easy for users to create lists of recipients, allowing easy group file sharing, and because the site offers realtime functionality, users will see instant notifications (Growl-style) on both the start of transfer and completion. Each file also has its own comment thread, which makes it easy for users to enter into a private conversation about the specific files being sent. Kicksend’s group file sharing and lists are similar in conception to Google+’s circles (except for file sharing, of course). The site is currently free for up to 1GB of sending bandwidth, and, according to Kicksend Co-founders Pradeep Elankumaran and Brendan Lim, the startup’s future monetization strategy consists of adding premium features, wherein users will likely get a 10GB capacity per month, as well as delivery alerts, and a full set of detailed analytics. The startup also plans to add an enterprise plan for businesses, which will offer notifications, analytics, as well as the ability to mark certain files as fully “private”. So far, just on a word-of-mouth basis, Kicksend has amassed 15,000 registered users and has sent over 40,000 files. At this point, the founders said, photos have been the most popular files shared, but musicians have also been using Kicksend to transfer large GarageBand files, as the use cases continue to diversify.  Kicksend’s desktop apps, available both for Mac and Windows, allow users to easily send big files, automatically downloading the files to the recipient’s computer. The founders gave the example of the case in which someone sends you a large batch of photos via Kicksend, and the desktop app automatically receives the files and will instantly organize them on your hard drive — all with direct hooks into your social graph via Facebook connect. The startup’s backend infrastructure is also optimized for content delivery, so that it can rout any type of media and data to any end point; and when the startup launches its mobile apps, users will be able to take a photo on their phone and instantly rout the image to any other device. The web app, too, is seamless and easy to use, allowing a user to browse all the files he or she receives and sends. The UI is simple, and really seems intended to have Kicksend become part of the infrastructure of one’s daily life, both on the desktop and on the web. Your parents are going to love it. Kicksend’s current investors include Y Combinator, Start Fund, and SV Angel.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes, when faced with an important decision, flipping a coin to let chance determine the outcome just won’t do. Instead, when life brings us to a crossroads, where two paths diverge and both seem equally walkable, we most often turn to family, friends, and trusted advisors to help us face facts and make the best choice. Or some more cavalier among us might opt for the “Magic 8-ball” approach. Of course, it’s only appropriate that, in the digital age where we have Facebook walls, Twitter streams, and polling sites, important life decisions can now take into account our social graph — or be made by way of some quick online crowdsourcing. The latter approach is the one Mike Moradian is taking in regard to a very tricky decision he’s currently facing. Moradian was accepted into Harvard Business School in December, making him the envy of many aspiring post-graduate entrepreneurs and businesspeople. Harvard’s business school is consistently ranked in the top 5 by just about every publication that tracks such rankings, has a slate of notable alumni, and is a feather in the cap of any resume.  On the other hand, Moradian is the founder of CampusBuddy and CollegeBudget, both of which we’ve covered on several occasions, including most recently the launch of the latter. CampusBuddy, which offers college students a social platform where they can also access official grade records and view comprehensive reviews about professors, classes, departments, and campuses, currently claims over 200K monthly active users, with over 1.5 million total, and the startup’s revenue has quadrupled over the last year. And with the enormous popularity of group buying and daily deals, CollegeBudget, which launched last week to bring those two very things to college campuses across the country, could potentially have a long life and a few dollars worth of revenue potentially in store. CollegeBudget, in particular, is what Moradian is most excited about; it’s really the main reason he’s considering not attending Harvard, as it’s an idea that will require a lot of legwork to build into a legitimate business, whereas CampusBuddy is more stable, he said. Thus, one can start to see that Moradian does have a difficult choice in front of him: Does he leave his startups behind and enter Harvard’s MBA program, or does he regretfully decline Harvard’s offer and help build his businesses into what could be multi-million dollar enterprises? Moradian, who was ranked (along with CampusBuddy) as America’s Best Young Entrepreneur in 2010 by Bloomberg Businessweek, tells me that he knows he can’t do both; if he were to attempt to split his time, he would be doing a disservice to his startups and to Harvard. So, he’s decided to turn the decision over to the masses via crowdsourcing. And whatever the crowd decides, he will follow through on their choice. He’s serious about it, because he knows he’s fortunate to have the choice in the first place. He has opened up voting on this landing page, so users can vote here. Moradian opened up voting last week to CollegeBudget users, and over 20,000 people have cast their votes. So far, it’s 53 percent to 47 percent in favor of Harvard. Moradian’s decision to crowdsource this choice is especially interesting in light of the recent debate over the efficacy of higher education in the U.S. Back in April, TC’s Sarah Lacy wrote a post detailing Peter Thiel’s thoughts on how higher education is currently the next bubble along with his founding of the “Thiel Fellowship” that financially and conceptually encourages young people to “stop out” of school and pursue their entrepreneurial and creative dreams. The project itself as well as the ideas inherent to Thiel’s foundation stirred up some heated debate, including responses from Vivek Wadhwa and Thiel Fellowship winner Dale Stephens. As for Moradian, he understands that the rising cost and inaccessibility of education is one of the biggest problems facing young people in the U.S., and staying with his startups would help him do that. Yet, when Harvard sends you a letter of acceptance and with that comes the inherent promise of becoming better schooled in the right ways to tackle these large problems, it’s difficult to say “no”. So, what would you do? And what do you think Moradian should do? Vote here, and let us know in the comments below.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Enterprise cloud app management company Okta has raised $16.5 million in Series B funding from Greylock Partners, Khosla Ventures, Andreessen Horowitz and FLOODGATE. This brings the company’s total funding to $28 million.  Okta is a cloud application management service. Okta’s platform allows companies to have control of their users, applications, and data both in the cloud and behind the firewall. The startup was founded by Todd McKinnon, the former VP of Engineering of the most successful cloud-based company to-date, Salesforce.  As McKinnon tells us, Okta is providing a platform for companies to manage corporate IT. He explains that traditional security and management platforms aren’t going to work with the cloud. When moving to the cloud, IT admins face the challenge of securing and controlling users and access, simplifying the adoption and scaling of these applications, and at the same time making sure that the business is optimizing its applications in the cloud. Companies who are using cloud-based applications like Salesforce and Google Apps need an identity and directory service in the cloud as a place where they can store user profiles and more. Okta gives IT managers the ability to maintain one central directory and replicate this to all cloud applications.  The company launched the product to public in Janaury. McKinnon says that he originally thought customers would be small to medium businesses, but has recently seen a uptake in large companies using Okta. Companies using Okta include Enterasys Networks, Pandora, T.D.Williamson, AMAG Pharmaceuticals and others. The company says the use of Okta’s on-demand service has ramped up dramatically to power over 1 million authentications per month. And McKinnon envisions a larger empire of cloud IT management services that ’empower businesses to eliminate cloud adoption barriers.’ Ben Horowitz, who led the company’s Series A round, has said of Okta: Okta’s initial product aims to solve the Cloud identity problem. I like the problem, because it is seriously different in the cloud than it is on-premise and, for new companies, different equals good. He belivees that the market opportunity is huge “because the cloud identity market will likely become the cloud management market. Given that those current markets combined are between $10B and $20B (depending on what you count), the resulting market will be extremely large.” The new funds will be used for sales and marketing efforts, as well as for ramping up distribution. As part of this transaction, David Weiden of Khosla Ventures will become a board advisor, and Aneel Bhusri, co-founder and co-CEO of Workday, will join the Okta Board of Directors.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily As you may know, content curation platform Storify, which launched at TechCrunch Disrupt last fall, brings together Tweets, Facebook Status Updates, videos and more from social networking sites to create a realtime view into a story or issue. Today, the startup is announcing a first of its kind partnership with Breaking News, an MSNBC-owned Twitter handle and web site for realtime updates on news breaking in the world. Here’s how Storify works. Storify allows you to build and embed a story around a gathering of Tweets, Flickr photos, Facebook status updates, YouTube videos and more Within Storify’s platform, you can simple search and drag content into your Storify story. Once you create a story with all of this curated content, you can then embed the actual story in your blog or content management system via single like of Javascript.  With the Breaking News partnership, Storify users can now add updates from the @BreakingNews Twitter accounts, as well as other updates from the newswire. So Breaking News is now a source, similar to Twitter, Facebook, YouTube and others.   What makes the partnership unique is that on BreakingNews.com, you can create a Storify story directly from a news story. Storify has created a special button (similar to the Tweet button or Like function), which allows anyone to create and embed a Storify story from a Breaking News piece. Co-founder Burt Herman explains that this is the first two-way partnership for Storify, where a publisher has integrated the creation tool on its website. And he’s looking to form similar source partnerships with other major publishers.   Storify, which recently raised $2 million from Khosla Ventures, is already being used by a number of news organizations, including Al-Jazeera. Storify has been in public beta since April 25, and is about to cross 100,000 stories created, and is averaging 6.5 million story views per month across all sites.   We’ve embedded an example of a Storify news story below. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Plimus, a company that provides a SaaS to power e-commerce for retailers, has been acquired by private equity firm Great Hill Partners For $115 million. Plimus has previously raised $18 million from Susquehanna Growth Equity. Plimus builds and manages online businesses for thousands of software publishers, Web hosting companies and online retailers. A business can choose Plimus hosted application that spans the entire e-Commerce lifecycle, or it can deploy the a ‘Plimus Buy Anyware’ API which allows retailers to integrate the technology with existing solutions. Using Plimus’ software, retailers can deliver newsletters to customers, coupons and promotions, realtime reporting, live chat and more. Plimus has a user base of more than 6,500 small to medium size business and enterprises worldwide. Plimus competitor BigCommerce just raised $15 million in new funding. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BigTime Software, which offers cloud-based productivity software tools to professional services firms, this morning announced that it has raised $2 million in Series A funding in a round from LTC Partners, Geneva Venture Investment Management, Hickory Grove and Howell Capital. The company delivers time, billing and practice management software-as-a-service that integrates with Intuit QuickBooks to professional services firms in industries like accounting, architecture, marketing services and IT services. BigTime Software was originally founded in 2002 and used to go by the name Edison’s Attic. The extra capital will be used to enhance sales, marketing and product development efforts. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile and Web analytics firm Webtrends this morning announced that it has acquired real-time analytics company Reinvigorate, a portfolio company of Media Temple‘s investment arm. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. The acquisition of Reinvigorate adds real-time analytics expertise to Webtrends’ offering of mobile, social and Web analytics and engagement solutions. In addition, Webtrends says, Reinvigorate’s solution brings new data visualization technologies such as heat maps, link maps and visitor path analysis to its analytics solution portfolio. The company adds that the Reinvigorate solution will continue to be offered to existing customers. Media Temple Ventures is the ‘innovation and investment group’ of web hosting and virtualization solutions company Media Temple – its portfolio also includes Virb.com, MobileRoadie.com and Krop.com. Alternative real-time analytics providers include Chartbeat, Woopra, Clicky and Mixpanel. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last month, Nick Paumgarten penned a lengthy article for The New Yorker detailing the rise of online dating and the effect it’s had on web culture. Among other things, Paumgarten alludes to some eye-opening statistics about the industry, including the fact that fee-based dating sites have become, collectively, a billion-dollar industry, that “one in six new marriages is the result of meetings on Internet dating site”, and that online dating is now the third most common way for people to meet. While much of the early blush (or stigma) around using an online platform to pursue a relationship is wearing off, some of the same friction that has always been there still exists: From the awkwardness of online-to-offline interaction, the potential danger of meeting an an eStranger, relying on algorithms to find your “match”, etc. And, somewhat ironically, for being socializing facilitators, most online dating sites seek to connect users with new people while remaining disconnected from their actual social life. As Paumgarten points out, online dating still is still inherently isolating. Michael Parikh and Andrew Flachner, the co-founders of a new dating site called DuoDater, agree that there are still some very fundamental problems with current approaches to online dating (and, well, dating in general). Creating an online dating profile can be difficult; it’s hard to find the right things to say about yourself that will help the site, whether algorithmically-based or not, help match you with the right person, the co-founders said. Not to mention the facts that messaging a stranger can be a somewhat stressful process, and meeting them in person without much in the way of background is awkward, and sometimes unsafe. So, the San Francisco-based startup is offering a platform that aims to be a bit more social and perhaps less intimidating that the model championed by current dating sites: Double dates. DuoDater is aimed at men and women in their 20s and 30s who are looking to socialize and meet new people — with the help of a co-pilot. The co-founders think that, by allowing users to have a friend by their side while on a date, the interaction can be more natural and (hopefully) less awkward way to socialize and make friends.  DuoDater is also structured in such a way as to make the creation of a dating profile a less nerve-racking process. The site offers “Duo Profiles” that only require users to write a few sentences about themselves individually, so that the main attraction is turned to creating a joint description that the pair of daters can work on together to fill out. Flachner said that, so far, DuoDater’s users have found this a less problematic and more enjoyable approach to dating profiles.  The founders also think that their model provides a higher level of accountability than is typically inherent to solo dating, as users are less likely to use trick photo angles and exaggerated or romanticized descriptions when they know a close friend will see it and may call them on it.  DuoDater also adds “featured date” ideas, so that new users can get off and running more easily and get out there and test out the model.  When I asked the founders whether they had considered a group dating option, they said that their market research and due diligence had shown that users prefer double dating to the latter because it still provides a level of intimacy that makes the experience feel like an actual date, rather than a loose, social gathering.  The founders said that, while there are a few successful group dating sites, group profiles take the focus off individuals and organizing an outing for a large group of people can be a hassle — something many are familiar with. Of course, the inherent risk to DuoDater’s model is that one of the large players in the dating space, like Match.com, eHarmony, PlentyOfFish, and OK Cupid, could establish their own double dating service and quickly have the startup beat in terms of user base. But Flachner said that he thinks DuoDater is well-positioned as an alternative because it focuses on the casual atmosphere of double dating and is centered around events and experiences, rather than relying on an algorithmic model (a potentially less “human” approach) to connect actual people. DuoDater offers an interesting spin on traditional dating models and, really, it’s a wonder that this model isn’t something that’s been implemented on a large scale. Of course, that could be for good reason; without a fee-based model, it’s hard for dating sites to make money, and double dating does intrinsically bring its own challenges.  DuoDater is currently free to use, and as the startup is bootstrapped at this point, it will rely on its beta to test the waters to see if this approach is truly viable and can scale. A fee-based premium service could be on its future roadmap, too, which will likely include the ability to form more Duos, post more pictures, etc. Or having featured DuoDate ideas from restaurants, concert venues, and other businesses that pay to be featured on the site is also an option. For readers looking to do some early testing of the double dating platform, click over to DuoDater.com and enter the “TECHCRUNCH” invite code for access. Let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the outdoor inclined, there are hundreds of places to do some online shopping for gear and apparel. Outdoorsmen and women can simply visit their favorite brand’s site, whether it be REI, Backcountry, Moosejaw, or Patagonia, but there’s really not much in the way of aggregation in outdoor retail. (Though there are European sites like GearZone.) As comparison shopping, loyalty, rebate and coupon sites have taken off in niche verticals, it’s only natural that the outdoor industry find its way into the mix. Active Junky, a startup founded in 2009 that relaunched this week, is aiming to be a niche resource that brings together the biggest brands in the outdoor gear and apparel industry and allows users to share their opinions about these retailers, and get cash back for making purchases. Active Junky is working with over 100 affiliates, including those mentioned above, to create a competitive marketplace for retailers, in which the biggest names will vie for new customers based on how much cash back they can earn through Active Junky, which, considering the price of a new pair of skis, will likely be of interest to cash-strapped outdoors enthusiasts.  Active Junky is essentially an Ebates-type cash back model for the outdoor industry in which users can browse through the site’s database of over 80,000 products to compare prices from retailer, clicking over to the retailer’s site to buy the product, earning cash back for every purchase. (ShopStyle for the outdoor market meets Ebates.) Every 3 months, Active Junky cashes out a user’s “Junky Account”, at which point it will credit the user’s account on Paypal or donate the cash back to one of the startups non-profit partners, like the Nature Conservancy.  However, the startup’s goal here is not just to create a pure coupon or deal site, copy-and-pasting the Ebates or Fat Wallet model, says Founder and CEO Kevin McInerney, but to create a full-service community around the outdoor action sports world. Active Junky not only allows its users to compare prices on gear from outdoor brands and make purchases, but also offers content on adventure travel, action sports news, original videos, as well as gear reviews from the site’s writers and users.  In the near future, Active Junky plans to roll out a reward system, a la Gogobot or Consmr, in which users will be incentivized to write long-form, detailed reviews on products and gear. The more reviews users write, and the more active they are on the site, they will earn badges and rewards, as well as discounts and deals from the startup’s retail partners. The site also features a “Social Wall”, where users can keep tabs on what their friends are buying and reviewing, and post recommendations or suggestions for gear.  In its current form, Active Junky is positioning itself as an affiliate marketing platform for outdoor brands, driving traffic to the websites of those brands and, through partnerships, taking a cut of the increased revenue from sales and advertising efforts. While brands in all industries have been utilizing affiliate marketing through rewards programs, loyalty, comparison shopping, and all sorts of third party strategies for some time, the consumer is often unaware of these partnerships and how a comparison or cash back site (like Active Junky) profits from these relationships. McIerney said that he wants Active Junky to be as transparent as possible in these forms and educate the site’s users about the commissions it receives from its retail partners, including offering the lionshare of those profits to its users. “In the end, since it’s the user’s purchase, and because it’s their cookie we are tracking, we want our customers to experience the upside of that relationship”, McInerney said. “We want our customers to trust us, and we feel that transparency and profit-sharing is a good way to do this”. Active Junky has currently raised $150K in angel funding and is looking to pursue further investment as it moves forward with its rewards programs. For more, check out the video below, and let us know what you think. How can Active Junky better serve its users and become a go-to niche resource for the outdoor industry? Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: This guest post was written by Dave Chase, the CEO of Avado.com, a Patient Relationship Management company that was a TechCrunch Disrupt finalist. Previously he was a management consultant for Accenture’s healthcare practice consulting to 25 hospitals and was the founder of Microsoft’s Health business. You can follow him on Twitter @chasedave. ZocDoc just announced a $50M round from DST. Where many have failed, ZocDoc has shown that a disruptive new model executed properly can actually work in healthcare. Healthtech startups can take several lessons away from the ZocDoc experience observing from the outside what they have accomplished. Scrappiness matters. ZocDoc’s CEO & Co-founder, Cyrus Massoumi was tenacious in getting close to his first customers and doing whatever it took to close his first customers. He has shared that he waited in a doctor’s waiting room for 5 hours to speak with one doctor he wanted. In another case, he was escorted out of the building by security due to his persistence. Focus pays off. ZocDoc appears to have ignored the siren song of any number of diversions from their core. This could have included getting into pricing elasticity or electronic health records. They do one thing exceptionally well — they fill open slots on doctors’ and dentists’ appointment calendars. Now that they’ve proven this, there’s logical places for them to extend. For example, think about what happens after scheduling an appointment (insurance eligibility, reminding patients about appointments, etc). With the credibility they’ve established, they can increase revenue per customer if they offer those services to a doctor. Great investors help. While I’m sure their investors would give the ZocDoc team most of the credit, it can’t hurt to have Vinod Khosla, Marc Benioff and Jeff Bezos as early investors followed by the Founders Fund and SV Angel. Honing their sales model. It appears they don’t use their website for sales to clinicians. Their website is almost entirely focused on consumer acquisition. Their strategy to acquire their paying customers may be viewed as “old school” (i.e., field and inside sales) but it has been effective. It sounds like they make a significant investment in sales development which is a great way to maximize the value of a salesforce. Word of mouth still works. Doctors and dentists talk with each other and by providing them a great experience, they are getting plenty of inbound lead generation. Too often, startups rush growth and it bites them back with a bad customer experience and negative word of mouth. No doubt, this is helping drive inbound interest. Start small to go big. As Salesforce.com and others have shown, starting with small customers is a great way to get initial traction. In ZocDoc’s case, they went to individual doctors rather than pursuing hospitals and large clinics. No doubt, that opportunity exists if/when they want it but they’ve shown you can build a business with small providers first. This can open up later opportunities with hospitals. Stage rollout by geography. This is particularly critical in their model but I think it will matter for many healthtech startups. Having critical mass in a particular geography makes sense from a sales and marketing standpoint helping compress the sales cycle and learning curve. An alternative to this would be staging by specialty – i.e., focus on one specialty before moving to another. Lead with the doctors. As Google Health’s failure demonstrated, leading with the consumer and expecting them to pull in physicians isn’t likely to be successful. ZocDoc focused first on getting doctors on board to have a critical mass of available appointments. While they have done consumer marketing, my impression is that doctors are now encouraging their patients to schedule appointments this way creating a virtuous cycle. If a doctor (or any business) tells you the preferred way to interact with them, most consumers will do it. In contrast, most doctors wouldn’t heed a patient or two telling them to use some new tool. Technology-enabled services appeal to healthcare. Doctors, for the most part, don’t care about the technology. I doubt they think about the underlying architecture of ZocDoc’s solution. Rather, they care about the outcome ZocDoc provides – filling empty appointment slots. For many of their customers, they are the #1 source of new patients. WhiteGlove Health is another startup providing a technology-enabled service having success — their IPO is this week. Technology as an enabler, rather than as the centerpiece, matters more the smaller the target customer as a general rule. Congratulations to Cyrus Massoumi and the ZocDoc team for knocking it out of the park. This is a great example of the disruption in healthcare that is greatly needed. Read more on Cyrus’ blog post. Latest headlines delivered to you daily China currently has the most Internet users of any country in the world, with some 420 million people connecting to the Web. Some more recent statistics even put that number as high as 485 million. Granted, China has a population of just over 1.3 billion, which means only 32 percent of its population is using the Web, a percentage far lower than the U.S. and Japan (at at 77 percent and 78 percent, respectively). Of course, with web activity continuing to grow rapidly in China, the Asian power represents an enormous digital market, even as the so-called “Great Firewall of China” has made it difficult (or impossible) to fully transport international digital technologies and businesses into the Chinese ecosystem. Thanks to China’s strict web regulation (and IP blocking, among other things), in the big picture, U.S. businesses have failed to make a significant impact, even in spite of the fact that China’s web users have begun adopting social networking, microblogging, gaming and more, with gusto.   Twitter has been blocked in China since 2009, for example, but that hasn’t stopped Chinese companies from adopting Twitter-like microblogging platforms at home. The use of “weibo” sites (the Chinese translation of “microblogging”) has exploded in China in the last few years, and two companies in particular have come to dominate the market: Tencent and Sina.  Of course, the matter of which company is winning the “weibo race” in China is open to debate. The reason for this is that Tencent has essentially become, as iChinaStock.com puts it, what AIM, Myspace, Facebook, and Twitter would be were they combined together into one, giant amalgamated enterprise.  Tencent’s IM application, QQ Messenger (a.k.a. QQ), claims to have 674 million active users, (although it’s very likely that estimate is high by several hundred million). QQ is the service from which Tencent signs up its users and then funnels them into its other products and services, including games, search, and Tencent Weibo, to name a few.  According to iChinaStock, microblogging in China really took off with the rise in popularity of Sina Weibo in 2009 and 2010; today, the popular microblogging service has nearly 140 million users. Yet, since Tencent launched Tencent Weibo in 2010, its service, too, has been growing at a breakneck pace, today claiming over 200 million registered users.  However, iChinaStock estimates that only about 93 million of those users are active on the service, and while this number remains open for debate, it is likely that as many as 40 percent of Tencent Weibo users are registering through QQ, which makes those registered stats run high, while in fact many of those users aren’t even active. As always, the issue of identifying “registered” versus “active” users is delicate, and when it comes to these Chinese microblogging services, much of the data is either unpublished, unreliable, or an estimation.  Yet, in regard to which company is winning the race, Digimind, a solution provider that offers competitive intelligence as well as e-reputation, data mining and social media monitoring, has whipped up a nifty little infographic that gives us a peek into the Weibo War, and how the leaders stack up against Twitter. (See below) While Digimind has Sina Weibo as the clear leader in China’s microblogging space, Tencent is certainly not to be dismissed, as it is growing exponentially, has an integrated, multi-level platform from which to channel users into its Weibo, and is spending millions on marketing to bring new users to its service. That being said, those who I spoke to at Digmind, along with sources in China (as well as iChinaStock) all agree that Sina Weibo likely outranks Tencent in terms of the quantity of active users as well as the quality. With Sina owning 57 percent of the Chinese microblogging market and finding high adoption among Chinese celebrities (not to mention have a relatively stable platform without a lot of downtime), Sina looks like the clear frontrunner. Not to mention that the company acquired “weibo.com” and “weibo.cn” — two fairly important domain names for a company looking to dominate the weibo market. Plus, they’re just easier to remember. While Sina Weibo compares favorably to Twitter in terms of adoption in China, the fact of the matter is that Twitter has a far broader reach, now being translated into 11 languages, whereas Sina and Tencent remain localized to the Chinese market. (Although Sina Weibo is planning to launch an English language version sometime soon.) Of course, it may be that the market is so huge that neither company will effectively become the “Twitter of China”, though Sina Weibo certainly seems to have the competitive advantage at this point.  However, with Tencent’s broader platform and patent ownership reaching into areas including instant messaging, e-commerce, online payment services, search, information security, and gaming, Tencent is diversified to say the least. And, with the massive adoption of QQ, perhaps it is Tencent that has first dibs on a bigger prize: China’s social graph. Let us know what you think. Further reading: For a really excellent comparison of Sina Weibo and Tencent (and Tencent Weibo), check out iChinaStock.com’s analysis here, and Bill Bishop of DigiCha’s analysis here. Without further ado, the infographic:  Excerpt image courtesy of Technode Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve known for weeks now that Dropbox has been talking to investors about a new mega round of funding. The company, which has only raised $7.2 million in a seed and Series A round in 2007, has been seeking something between $200 million and $300 million, we’ve heard. But now we know a bit more. And we’ve heard something from one source that is nothing short of shocking. Dropbox held an auction last week during which investors made their bids to participate in the new round, multiple sources tell us. This week, Dropbox met with the VCs that made bids, and have been collecting term sheets. All they have to do now is decide. Here’s the really crazy thing: one of the offers being considered may push Dropbox’s valuation to $10 billion post-money, one source tells us. Another source thinks that’s inaccurate, and believes the final valuation will settle closer to the lower end of the $5 billion to $10 billion valuation we reported last month. A $10 billion valuation would be amazing for a number of reasons. But consider this: Pandora and LinkedIn, two companies that recently went public, have market caps of $2.16 billion and $8.63 billion, respectively. Yes, a startup with just 65 employees could be worth more money on paper than those two public darlings. Also consider: Yahoo has a market cap of just $15.30 billion. And our parent, AOL, has a market cap of just $1.72 billion. Dropbox has 25 million users (many of which are paying), uploading 200 million files a day. More to come soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There is a lot of creative talent out there, but for a long time, designers, artists, and creative professionals were underrepresented in the digital world. Not only that, but the Web happens to be a perfect medium for artists to showcase their talents, distribute their portfolios, and hook up with benefactors. So, back in early 2008, Scott Belsky and co-founder Matias Corea, along with engineering leads Dave Stein and Chris Henry, launched Behance, a platform for creative professionals to showcase their talents, designed, in the big picture, to put control back into the hands of creatives and give their ideas the opportunity to see the light of day.  After fits and starts, Behance has become one of the go-to resources for creatives to efficiently organize and showcase their work in an effort to give their careers a jump start. The Behance Network, the team’s flagship platform, allows creative types to create multi-media portfolios and distribute those across Behance partner sites and, most significantly, LinkedIn.  Last year, Behance launched the “Creative Portfolio Display”, which allows users to bridge creative and social networks and connect their portfolios right to their LinkedIn accounts. While Behance is not revealing exact figures, Behance CEO Scott Belsky did confirm that over 100,000 LinkedIn members are now using the application to showcase their creative portfolios on their LinkedIn profiles and keep them in sync. Behance also launched “The 99%”, its research arm and think tank, which includes an eponymous webzine and conference that offers creatives tips, articles, and the opportunity to network in an effort to move ideas to execution and assist creatives in the endeavor to removing “starving” from “starving artist”. Both the Behance Network and its 99% wing have become a great resource for recruiters, editors, and fans to find inspiring creative work and talent for hire. In fact, today, Behance has revealed a few new, cool stats to TechCrunch, which provide a glimpse into the network’s growth. Today, over 1 million projects have been published by creative professionals on Behance, with over 20,000 new projects launched every week that contain over 100,000 images and videos.   As Behance tracks the data behind each of these projects, including what tools were used to create them, who the client was, who collaborated on the project, and how many people viewed and “appreciated” them (Behance’s equivalent of Facebook’s “like”), the network is taking strides to build a “creative graph”. Just like the social graph, the interest graph, and more, Behance is using this data to give creatives a glimpse into trends like which equipment, resources, and software are most popular among certain channels of the creative world.  In the future, says Behance Co-founder and CEO Scott Belsky, this could mean that Behance pursues a LinkedIn-type business model, wherein it helps top brands and companies explore its database in very specific ways to search for, track, and hire talent — in an effort to assist companies in the searching and tracking of everything made with their product or for their brand. Beyond powering creative networks and portfolio display on LinkedIn, AIGA, and AdWeek, Behance is behind more than 12 sites that are now receiving over 51 million pageviews per month, from over 7 million visitors, and Apple, Nike, Netflix, and Facebook (among others) are regularly posting jobs and searching for talent in design, illustration, creative direction, etc. What’s more, creative work on Behance received over 16.5 million “appreciations”, and its projects and portfolios received over 11.5 million views on LinkedIn. The creative network also recently launched its “ProSite”, which provides users with a portfolio-website builder to create customizable portfolios without any prior coding or engineering experience, which also happens to be pretty affordable at $11 a month. With ProSite, Behance adds to the suite of features available on its network, and gives creatives a robust resource to get their work discovered and into the hands of the people who write the checks. For more stats and information on Behance, the team has created a nifty infographic, which you can check out here.  Or check out the video below for additional info on ProSite: Latest headlines delivered to you daily MyNines, a startup that made its debut back in 2009, has gone belly up. The company, which we likened to a ‘Kayak for private sales’, wasn’t able to secure the financing needed to sustain the business. MyNines aimed to help consumers sort through the daily flash sales sites by aggregating products for sale and offering users the ability to search and filter by designer, category, highest discounts, as well as deals ending soonest, most viewed items, deals under $100, and newly listed. We received an email from CEO and cofounder Apar Kothari, who has moved on a VP role at private sale shopping destination site Rue La La, where she will be heading up business development and strategic partnerships. Writes Kothari, who was previously manager of corporate development at Fox Interactive Media: Dear Friends & Colleagues, After an incredible two years chasing my dreams as CEO/Cofounder of MyNines, I’m thrilled to continue the next phase of my techfashion career as Head of New Business Development & Strategic Partnerships at Rue La La. While MyNines embodied the perfect  blend of my passion for fashion & entrepreneurship, I didn’t have the resources to scale it. I’m super-excited to not only leverage the assets I acquired at MyNines, but also to work with a rockstar exec team at RLL.  I’ve learned a ton & my deep experience in the flash sale/fashion world provides the optimal springboard to identify game-changing opportunities for RLL. Kothari will be based in Rue La La’s New York office. MyNines, which is now offline, was originally founded in 2009 and raised $500,000 in seed funding. We’ve added the startup to the TechCrunch deadpool. Latest headlines delivered to you daily TechCrunch Disrupt finalist CloudFlare is teaming up with realtime website translation service Smartling to allow users to translate their websites into any language. As you may know, CloudFlare offers a service that protects websites from online threats, promises and increase in page load speeds, and more. Smartling offers a large, scale SEO-friendly realtime translation service for websites. The company has a hybrid model which allows you to pick between professional translators, machine translations, and crowdsourced translations. Now Smartling will offer an app to all Cloudflare users that enables these translations along with securing and stabilizing their site. This is the first partnership of this kind for Smartling, which has helped Foursquare, Survey Monkey and Scribd translate their sites. In fact, Smartling’s cloud-based platform is now being used by CloudFlare to translate its website and application into 27 languages to start. The German, Indonesian, Portuguese and Norwegian sites are well under way. Smartling just raised $10 million in new funding. CloudFare recently made waves when it was revealed the security service was being used by infamous hackers LulzSec. And CloudFare just announced a $20 million round of funding.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Taiwanese smartphone maker HTC this morning announced that it has agreed to acquire, through its HTC America Holding unit, 100% of Seattle-based mobile-web connected services company Dashwire for a maximum purchase price of $18.5 million to boost its HTCSense.com mobile cloud services offering. Dashwire offers a range of consumer, social and device management software services for mobile operators, device makers and retailers. The company’s platform is available for Android, Windows Mobile, Symbian and BlackBerry. On its website, Dashwire says it is backed by investors who ‘built the wireless and technology industries’ at McCaw Cellular, Western Wireless, Voicestream, Nextel, China Unicom, and Microsoft.  Another investor is Best Buy Capital, the retail giant’s investment arm. At the end of last year, Dashwire raised $1 million in debt financing. The company was founded by CEO Ford Davidson, a former Product Manager in the Mobile Devices group at Microsoft. Dashwire’s CTO, James Prudente, helped build critical elements of Amazon’s web operation in its early days, and also helped create the Amazon Mobile group. Related: Smartphone Maker HTC Buys S3 Graphics From VIA, WTI For $300 Million HTC Invests In Multimedia Delivery Platform Company Saffron Digital  Latest headlines delivered to you daily On Deck Capital, the platform that helps connect small businesses with capital, has raised $19 million of its own in a series C funding round. The startup raised $15 million back in January from SAP Ventures and recently added another $4 million from SF Capital Group, a New York–based private investment firm. As part of the new funding, SF Capital Group President Neil Wolfson will be joining On Deck’s board of directors. Wolfson joins David Hartwig, the managing director at SAP, who signed on to the board following his firm’s investment. On Deck has raised a total of $38 million from investors including Contour Venture Partners, First Round Capital, Khosla Ventures, RRE Ventures and Village Ventures. On Deck has been on a good run lately, as its added two senior executives to its sales and business development teams, made an appearance at a Clinton Global Initiative forum in Chicago, has doubled its month-to-month growth in customer acquisitions (to 4,000 customers) and loan applications in 2011, and has now connected small businesses with over $125 million in capital (at an average of loan size of $30K). You can read our original coverage of On Deck here. Launched in 2006, On Deck uses a blend of data aggregation and electronic payment technology to bring an alternative form of evaluating the health of small businesses in an effort to efficiently bring capital to small and medium sized businesses. While TechCrunch and other technology publications regularly cover startups raising big rounds from venture capital firms and angel investors (ahem, like this one), the truth is that there is an enormous population of small businesses in the U.S. that are unable to raise money from high-powered venture firms.  Traditionally, the avenue to capital for the many mom-and-pop shops on Main Street has been to apply for a bank loan. So, not only do businesses lack access to venture capital, but it is also a market that has been underserved by these traditional bank loans.  On Deck believes that the fundamental problem Main Street businesses face is not a credit and capital one (as it is so often diagnosed), but instead is an issue of time and technology. What does that mean? SMBs often cannot afford (or lack the expertise) to complete lengthy loan packages, and, on the flip side, banks are unwilling to afford the (admittedly prohibitive) expense of underwriting the sub-$250K financing space — not to mention those under $100K, for which the process is even more tedious. As a result, banks are largely forced to rely on the personal credit score of the business owner in evaluating a loan application, which is often a highly inaccurate reflection of the health of the business. Thus, On Deck tackles this problem by utilizing software that investigates a number of data points, including how many customers the business has, cash flow, sales, and registered complaints — all in an effort to find out whether the business is solid enough to repay a loan. So, instead of going on the personal credit score of the business owner, the company offers what it calls the “On Deck Score”, which is a business credit score developed to provide lenders with an effective measure of a small business’ creditworthiness. The On Deck Score was developed in partnership with Equifax.  Because the startup’s platform allows businesses to create merchant profiles, which links to electronic data sources, including online banking, accounting and merchant processing (and aggregates social, tax, and industry data), banks and lenders can more easily access a SMB’s complete financial profile. This saves lenders from the hassle of collecting the data themselves, or relying on personal credit scores to evaluate credit. Considering the fact that there are currently 5 million businesses that have 25 employees or less — a segment the U.S. economy relies on for 40 percent of its jobs — On Deck is providing an exceedingly valuable service in facilitating the underwriting of these businesses, and its new infusion of capital will ensure that the startup continues to bring disruptive technology to an underserved (and sizable) segment of the market. For more, check out On Deck at home here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily There are a few photo sharing apps out there on the market today, as you may have noticed. In fact, there are enough choices that TechCrunch’s own Alexia Tsostsis and former Myspace marketing guy Sean Percival created a flowchart to help you find you way to the right app. It’s a space that, while popular, is in desperate need of some fresh ideas. So, starting today, there’s yet another photo sharing app on the App Store, but this one has a pretty cool twist.  Founded in 2010, San Francisco-based GLMPS is a bootstrapped startup that is today releasing its eponymous iPhone app, which offers an experience the startup likens to a “visual status update”. What does that mean, exactly? Well, put simply: GLMPS blends video with traditional image capturing, so that the 5 seconds or so before one snaps a photo is captured by the app in quick, abbreviated video form.  Essentially, this is akin to “pressing play on your photos”, so that when you view a still image, a small thumbnail appears in the lower right hand portion of the screen, showing the moments leading up to capture in video — or suped-up .gif — form.  Once a user captures their photo, the photo-video loads in their iPhone photo library and then, like other photo sharing applications, they can easily share those glmpses via Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare, Tumblr, email, SMS, and so on. For today’s launch, GLMPS has partnered with Foursquare, among others, to add a further enriching photo-video layer to the check-in experience.  It’s a great idea, and one of those simple ones that, once you see it in action, it becomes hard to believe that it hasn’t been done before. Adding those few spontaneous moments before a photo is taken in video form, briefly taking one back in time, is a nifty feature. It doesn’t quite feel done yet, but there’s plenty of potential. Just ask Scoble. GLMPS is currently free on the iPhone, and Android apps (and beyond) are headed down the pipeline in the near future. The GLMPS team, which includes Paul Robinett, Nick Long, and Esther Crawford, will also soon be adding the ability to stitch together “glmpses” to create highlight reels of a user’s photo-video library from the perspective of the individual, or groups, based on time, tags, and location. “We saw GLMPS earlier this year and it was a no-brainer to integrate with the foursquare platform”, said Foursquare VP of Mobile & Strategic Partnerships Holger Luedorf. “GLMPS enriches the check-in experience by providing a quick, rich snapshot of the moment. It’s our goal to give our millions of users and our brand partners the ultimate engagement experience, and GLMPS is a powerful tool for everyone in the foursquare ecosystem”. For more info and to start glmpsing your life today, please visit http://www.glmps.com.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFounder Advice for Dispatch.IoIf you have a product that could potentially appeal to everyone, how do you pick which customers to go after first?  In this episode of Founder Office Hours with investors Chris Dixon and Josh Kopelman, Dispatch.io founder Jesse Lamb asks whether his file-sharing service should focus first on early adopters, consumers, or small businesses. Kopelman predicts, “You are going to reach them all the same way.  A big believer in the “consumerization of the enterprise,”, he says, “I am not sure you would do anything fundamentally different if you are going after a small business or a consumer.” But you have to start somewhere.  Dixon suggests to “find the people with the greatest pain” like designers who have to send big files to clients, or perhaps partner with an established service that Dispatch.io is building on top of to gain initial distribution.   Whatever approach Dispatch.io chooses, Kopelman says “sell an application rather than a platform.” Dispatch.io helps people share files across services, whether they are using Dropbox, Google Docs, or something else.  The company was a runner-up at the TechCrunch Disrupt Hackathon in New Yrok City earlier this year.    Watch the previous Founder Office Hours episodes with Schedit and Profitably, and other Founder Stories here.  Dispatch.io’s original 90-second Hackathon demo is below. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Everyone is curious to see how they rank against others, which is the fundamental appeal of Klout.  It gives you a social media ranking based on your influence on Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and now Foursquare, which Klout today is adding as the fourth social network that can help boost your score. While looking at how many people follow you or retweet you on Twitter might give a sense of how far your voice travels in the social media sphere, Foursquare adds a level of local intelligence. Presumably, your Foursquare score will be based on how often you check in, how many mayorships you’ve earned, and so on. But if you want to know by how much it will boost your score, you will have to wait up to 72 hours after you connect your Foursquare account to Klout because it doesn’t calculate it immediately.  But I wonder, once a large number of Foursquare mayors and other influentials add their accounts and their Klout scores go up, will other people’s go down if they don’t add theirs?  Is this the beginning of a social media arms race? It looks like Klout is also looking at who is leaving tips.  In its blog post, it reports the following Foursquare stats based on its own research: More than 2/3 of active Foursquare users post tips. These tips have a ready audience with each tip being done, on average, at least once. 80% of active users have “done” tips. I always read the tips when I check in somewhere.  They are one of the best parts of Foursquare.  Now, if only you could get Foursquare points for leaving them instead of more Klout. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Monetate, the platform that provides marketers with testing and targeting services for their websites, announced today that it has closed a $15 million series B funding round. The round was led by OpenView Venture Partners and adds to the $5.1 million series A round the company raised back in December from First Round Capital and FLOODGATE. The latest infusion of capital brings total investment to just over $20 million. Monetate Co-founders David Brussin and David Bookspan, like many entrepreneurs, have dabbled in several industries. In 2001, Brussin co-founded ePrivacy Group, which created programs, standards and products to protect the email marketing channel; he then went on to found TurnTide, an anti-spam router, which was acquired by Symantec in 2004. By the time Brussin was ready to move on to his next venture, he said, the thing that stuck out the most was how little the position of marketers had changed since the 1990’s.  Marketers were still living in an eCommerce world where they had little control over their own advertising, in spite of the strides taken in display, and were relying on IT teams to take care of the dirty work. So, in 2008, Brussin and Bookspan founded Monetate to allow marketers to gain control over the consumer website experience without having to be expert coders or hire more engineers.  Through its cloud-based marketing platform, Monetate enables marketers to design and run messaging and promotional campaigns, as well as testing those campaigns in realtime before deployment. Traditionally, retailers and brands have looked to port the same experience that customers have in-store to their online storefronts, but, by and large, the customization options online have paled in comparison to their brick and mortar counterparts.  Monetate gives the marketer the ability to change any part of the customer-facing interface in realtime, for any particular customer. Marketers can go into the platform and select targeting for, say, people in New York. Monetate pulls realtime weather data from the Web, while simultaneously gathering the customer’s location data, so that a retail marketer knows that a customer is in New York, where the temperature is cold, thereby allowing marketers to change what’s being offered on the homepage to, say, sweaters and jackets — a targeted and personalized experience for that customer, in realtime. The cool part of it is that Monetate gives marketers one line of Javascript code to add to their websites to enable these kind of targeted campaigns — users don’t have to be engineers, or at the office, to achieve this kind of functionality. Marketers, then, can be more spontaneous and focus on reacting to individual customers, testing ideas on the fly, rather than spending months testing campaign ideas, before slowly rolling those ideas out. Monetate has already attracted brands like Petco, Urban Outfitters, Sports Authority, QVC, Casual Male, Dick’s Sporting Goods, and more, which are now using the startup’s targeting and testing services on their eCommerce platforms. Brussin tells me that many of the brands the team is currently working with have added hundreds of millions in revenue, thanks to Monetate cutting the need for businesses to hire specialized teams, as well as decreasing bounce rates and shopping cart abandonment.  As Monetate is analyzing the data from a customer’s every page view, the startup takes the big data challenges that would normally be the work of an IT staff out of the hands of retailers. Of course, staying on top of those reams of data is no easy task, and while Brussin says that the team prides itself on a near flawless up-time, the startup’s latest infusion of capital will be used to help scale those data systems — as well as scale its own staff and marketing efforts.  For more on how Monetate works, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Rentcycle, a San Francisco-based startup that has been dubbed the “OpenTable for product rentals”, announced today that it has raised $1.4 million in seed funding. The round was led by Collaborative Fund, a young seed fund founded by Craig Shapiro that invests in startups focusing on peer-to-peer sharing of resources and creative innovations in business.  A host of other notable VCs and angels participated in the round as well, including Andreessen Horowitz, SV Angel, Founder Collective, and Amicus Capital, as well as angel investors including Max Levchin, co-founder of PayPal and Chairman at Yelp, and Founder of Shopzilla Farhad Mohit. As part of this infusion of seed capital, Rentcycle is also adding two well-known advisors to its management roster: Netflix Founder Marc Randolph and Chuck Templeton, the founder of the popular restaurant reservation service, OpenTable. (Templeton will also be joining Rentcycle’s board of directors.) According to Rentcycle Co-founder and CEO Tim Hyer, the startup will use the round to ramp up hiring, especially in the area of rockstar engineers. So what is it about this young startup that has such an impressive list of investors and advisors jazzed to be part of its collective roster? For starters, the product rental industry is an $85 billion space, the CEO tells me, and it happens to be one that is badly in need of an aggregating resource for all-things rental. It’s for this reason that the startup provides the composite industry (from tools and equipment, party and events to sports and leisure) with a full directory of the many mom-and-pop rental stores currently operating in the U.S.  So, when considering Rentcycle from the consumer’s perspective, the platform is a service that allows one to easily search, compare, and rent anything and everything online — from skis to jackhammers and bouncy houses to designer dresses. It’s all there under one roof. And for the merchant, Rentcycle offers cloud-based management solutions, which not only allow rental businesses to bring their brick and mortar operations online, but also enables them to track their inventory online and manage reservations and payments over the Web. Rentcycle graduated from Silicon Valley incubator Founder Institute in 2009, and has since gone through several beta launches, with the most recent iteration going live in March of this year. Since March, the startup has already grown to 30K monthly active users, and that’s been with the focus solely on beefing up rental supply and waiting for the demand to come, Hyer said. After all, in terms of the consumer, at first blush Rentcycle’s value proposition is obvious: For those who may still be feeling the effects of the recession, or for those who may not go skiing enough to make it worth buying a new pair of skis, for example, rental is the optimal way to go. Of course, traditionally, rental businesses — before sites like Netflix and Airbnb blasted onto the main stage — were few and far between.  But consumers have become far more comfortable with paying for access to products and services as an alternative to outright purchasing, and Rentcycle could very well find itself on the crest of that new wave, as it seeks to become the all-in-one rental resource for all stripes of digital commerce. Definitely one to watch. Chime in and let us know what you think. Screenshot and video below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile marketing service, Augme Technologies, today announced that it will be acquiring Hipcricket, a mobile marketing and advertising platform for $44.5 million — $6 million of which is in cash and $38.5 million in common stock. Hipcricket’s shareholders must approve the acquisition before it can be finalized, yet with the transaction also calling for a 12-month earn-out payment of an additional $27.5 million, it seems likely that the deal will be approved. Augme will take on all of Hipcricket’s 50-plus employees, but the mobile ad firm will continue to operate out of its offices in Kirkland, Washington. We profiled Augme in June as an under-the-radar company on the rise in the mobile advertising space, when it released the latest version of its Ad Life platform. As we wrote at the time, “Ad Life, allows marketers, brands, and agencies to plan, create, test, deploy, and track mobile marketing programs — with the most noteworthy feature of Augme’s patented technology being the fact that it is able to reach targeted groups while remaining device-agnostic”. Augme’s acquisition of Hipcricket follows hot on the heels of its acquisition of Jagtag for $5.5 million two weeks ago. As Jagtag specializes in bar codes and QR codes, and Hipcricket offers marketing solutions that touch on SMS, MMS, mobile websites, advertising networks, and branded applications, Augme is clearly firing on all cylinders in an attempt to round out its platform. “We expect the complementary resources of Augme, JAGTAG and Hipcricket, when combined, will allow Augme to provide the most powerful best-of-breed mobile marketing solutions to global brand name leaders, backed by strong intellectual property portfolio, including patented technology and software-as-a-service, (“SaaS”) technology platforms”, Augme CEO Paul Arena said. Augme has traded publicly on Over the Counter Bulletin Board since 2002. The company’s total revenue in 2011 was $2.8 million, but Augme management told me last month that it expects revenue to push $16 million in fiscal 2012 and will achieve positive cash flow the next year. Poised as the company is in a hot growth sector (Gartner expects mobile ad revenue to hit $3.3 billion by the end of 2011, more than double revenue in 2010 — and to hockey-stick to $20.6 billion by 2015), it wouldn’t be surprising to see the company continue to acquire attractive mobile solutions, adding pieces to its puzzle as it makes a play at becoming a leader in the mobile marketing space.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Local Response, a recently launched social advertising platform that allows local businesses to respond to the “check-in” with marketing campaigns, is making its first acquisition today. The startup (formerly Buzzd) is acquiring Philo, a social TV check-in and advertising platform backed by North Bridge Venture Partners, DFJ Gotham, Eniac Ventures, and others. Exact terms of the deal were not disclosed but we are told the transaction is all stock.  Similar to Miso and GetGlue, Philo operated a social check-in service for television shows. Using Philo, users could have a second screen experience with TV content by being able to see who else is watching show, access rewards for watching shows and checking in, and more.  But LocalResponse founder Nihal Mehta says that Philo has pivoted over the past year to an advertising model, called Reach.TV. Basically the company allows TV and movie studios track when people are Tweeting about a show or film and then send these viewers messages and @replies with promotions, ads and more. It was this pivot, that drew the attention of Mehta (not to mention that Mehta is a partner at Philo’s investor Eniac Ventures) Of course, LocalResponse has a similar model. The startup aggregates real-­time social media check-­‐ins from	Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare, Gowalla,	Instagram and dozens of	other services to provide a simple interface for local businesses to	directly respond to their most influential and valuable customers. What makes LocalResponse compelling is that it analyzes massive amounts of data in addition to check-ins from the Twitter firehose, photo sharing sites and more to find other forms of check-ins. These could be posting a picture on Instagram of a dish from a restaurant or Tweeting that you are visiting a particular bar. LocalResponse’s proprietary technology collects	and prioritizes social data both explicitly (i.e. check-ins on Foursquare) and implicitly (by analyzing natural language on Facebook, Twitter, etc.; e.g. “I’m headed to ShakeShack”). Mehta says most check-ins are actual implicit and many social media platforms catered to helping businesses track check-ins miss this key data. By allowing brands to focus on connecting with users on this implicit data of the sharing of opinions and mentions of content (i.e. TV shows and movies), LocalResponse will add another dimension to the its social advertising platform.  Philo also adds another way for large brands like content properties and entertainment companies to work with the LocalResponse. Mehta adds that Phili will also bring a seasoned engineering team to LocalResponse, and Philo’s CTO, Jessica Lowe, will become the new CTO of LocalResponse. Since its launch a few months ago, the company has been growing. LocalResponse recently signed its 25th major advertiser to its brand platform. In July, LocalResponse revealed some results of its first major brands, with campaigns performing 100 times better than traditional online media buys, including a 60% redemption rate. LocalResponse is backed by Verizon Ventures, Metamorphic Ventures, Extreme Venture Partners, Charles River Ventures, BOLDstart Ventures, Jim Pallotta, Greycroft Partners, and others. Mehta says the company is looking to raise another round but has also received a number of acquisition offers. In fact, he’s considered a number of term sheets and offers at the moment. It’s unclear which way Mehta will go, but LocalResponse is certainly on to something when it comes to using engaging advertising on social networks for both small businesses and brands.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in April, game developer The Casual Collective rebranded as Kixeye and launched a new realtime strategy game called Battle Pirates. Since then, the startup has been hard at work on raising some new capital to expand its team and roll out additional titles. This officially came to pass this morning, as the company announced that it has closed an $18 million series C funding round, bringing total investment to $23.5 million. The new round was led by Jafco Ventures, with contributions from returning investors, Trinity Ventures and Lightspeed Venture Partners. As part of the raise, Jafco Managing Partner Joe Horowitz is signing on to the startup’s board and will be joined by — in a big symbolic feather-in-the-cap for Kixeye — Zynga Co-founder Andrew Trader, a.k.a. “A.T.”  According to Kixeye CEO Will Harbin, the startup has hit its stride over the last 8 months, in which time it became profitable as well as cash-flow positive. So, in adding Trader to its board of directors, Kixeye is hoping to use the Zynga EVP of Sales and Business Development’s experience (especially in scaling Zynga into the largest player in social gaming) to help continue its own recent growth kick. As for Trader, he said that he’s watched Kixeye emerge as one of the leading innovators in the social gaming space, especially for hardcore gamers. “Gamers want great games, not re-skinned versions of the same thing”, A.T. said. “I’m excited to be a part of this company, and I look forward to helping them continue their successful trajectory”. And speaking of re-skinning and cloning, both are things that Kixeye has become extremely conscious of, considering that last week the startup accused well-funded competitor, Kabam, of copying its successful Backyard Monsters and re-skinning it for the beta launch of Kabam’s own Edgeworld. As VentureBeat’s Dean Takahashi reported at the time, accusations of re-skinning have become commonplace in the rapidly growing (and competitive) social games space, but Kixeye felt that this instance was “particularly egregious”. “It’s not only insulting to us”, Harbin told VentureBeat. “It’s very bad for this space. We are fighting an uphill battle to create hardcore games on Facebook. The more clones there are for these games, the more they could sour consumers on the whole market”.  And what’s more, accusations of stealing (and re-skinning) are also known to Zynga (and by extension, A.T.), which has been accused of stealing the original code for Farmville, for example. As such, social gaming players are each looking for ways to distinguish their brands and their titles from the competition. In the case of Kixeye, Harbin says that the company plans to use some of its new funding to begin a new, aggressive release cycle that will include some new approaches to social games. “Over the next year, we will be releasing one major title per quarter, starting with our upcoming RTS War Commander”, the CEO said. “We are also looking to create games on the Facebook platform that no one has seen before, including dynamic MMORPG’s, racing games, and, hopefully, titles that really push the envelope”. And Harbin has good reason to want to take these genres to Facebook, as racing, action, and hidden objects are among the genres that have few titles on Facebook at this point. And the company is growing at a rate that justifies its new ambition: Over the past 18 months, Kixeye has grown its team from 3 to 60, and has gone from little presence on Facebook to over 5 million monthly active users. Part of the reason, too, that Kixeye has been so adamant in defending Backyard Monsters is that the game was really what put Kixeye on the map, as its currently averaging more than 1 million daily active users.   So, as the San Francisco-based game developer goes forward with a wad of cash in its pocket, users can probably expect to see the startup continue to focus on creating Facebook titles for the hardcore gamer, in an attempt to make more interesting and challenging games that target an older and more mature audience. And I’d expect that going after top engineering talent will be a part of that effort. For more on Kixeye, check ’em out at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today, seed fund and accelerator, TechStars, will be hosting its “Demo Day” in Boulder, where it will showcase its 12 newest startups. The accelerator expects over 500 people to be on hand, including investors and venture funds, who will be on hand to vet the young founding teams and potentially take out those checkbooks.  Founded in 2006 in Boulder, TechStars has expanded its operations to include New York City, Boston, and (most recently) Seattle, where the accelerator holds seasonal programs for 10 to 15 startups, investing up to $18,000 of seed capital in each team at a 6 percent equity stake. And, so far, TechStars has proven valuable to its entrepreneurs; according to TechStars’ website, 81 percent of its alumni remain active or profitable, 10 percent have already been acquired, with 8 percent having gone out of business. Yesterday, TechStars announced an upcoming reality TV series that will follow a recent batch of New York City companies through the trials, tribulations, and pivots they experience as part of the accelerator program. Many of TechStars’ New York mentors, like Dennis Crowley of Foursquare and Fred Wilson of Union Square Ventures, make cameos, which will no doubt make for some good startup TV. Yet today’s Demo Day is all about Boulder startups, so without further ado, here is a look at the 12 startups launching today in Colorado:  Creative Brain Studios is a game development engine that solves many of the common problems facing game engineers. Their turnkey solution offers easy management of audio and visual files, incorporates game play, analytics, hosting, and monetization, as well as leveraging HTML5 to publish the game once and deploy it across smart phones, tablets, and desktops. Because tours and activities don’t have a mature distribution system, online travel companies are losing out on a $20+ billion opportunity. FlexTrip offers its API to online travel companies to monetize one of the most profitable areas of travel: tours and activities. The startup claims to boast “the world’s largest selection of tours and activities” as well as a unique recommendation engine to ensure the traveler gets matched with activities most suited to them.  FlexTrip has already tallied a few cool integrations, including one with TripIt.  FlixMaster creates technology that enables anyone to build what they call “branching-path video mash-ups”. This allows people to pull videos, audio files, forms and images from all over the web, enabling viewers to travel different paths through the video — all right within the video player. Their branching path video mashups provide a richer and more engaging experience for the consumer.  FullContact is an API that keeps contact information current. Developers can easily tap into FullContact’s database of more than 100 million contact records to quickly turn partial, out-of-date contact records into fresh, complete contact records. They use a crowdsourcing model to update the contact information, only share contact information that’s publicly available on the web, and unlike competitors like Plaxo and Jigsaw, they allow any software application to leverage their contact database via their API. GoSpotCheck is crowdsourced secret shopping for brands. They provide brands with realtime insights, such as price checks, shelf positioning, photos, and videos of in-store displays via a smartphone-weilding mobile workforce. Shoppers get paid cash to conduct these ‘missions’ simply by completing these simple tasks in the stores they’re already visiting. Unlike GigWalk, which allows for a range of activities, GoSpotCheck delivers a customized solution for brands in their retail settings. InboxFever is a platform and marketplace to build and sell email-powered applications. Email-powered applications are a new breed of applications to help people do common tasks faster on the web. They allow you to control your web applications simply by sending an email – no logins, no new user interfaces, no downloads. Test it by sending any word document to pdf@inboxfever.com and watch it return to you in seconds as a PDF.   MealTicket provides a mobile, social web platform for foodservice distributors to better engage with their restaurants. They do this via a deals and promotions social marketing tool that foodservice distributors pass on to their restaurants. The deals and promotions are distributed via MealTicket’s mobile app, Twitter and Facebook apps, and most importantly, their API partners, who ensure the offers are distributed across many web channels. The foodservice distributor and restaurant can collaborate on creating deals and promotions, ultimately protecting the restaurant’s bottom line, leveraging the salesforce of the foodservice distributor, and enabling the restaurant to leverage the social web with little-to-know social media expertise.  According to the startup, Mocavo is “the first and largest free genealogy search engine”. Previously, genealogists and family-history enthusiasts had to visit dozens of disparate websites to conduct searches, or pay an expensive monthly fee to find limited content. Today, people can now start an ancestral search for free at Mocavo.com. ReportGrid provides an API that makes it easy for SaaS vendors and technology platforms to give their customers deep analytics and insightful reporting. Different than normal analytics tools — this API plugs into a SaaS vendor’s product, allowing visualizations and analytics to become part of the product offering to their customers. Simple Energy is changing how millions of people save energy by changing how utilities engage their customers. Their web and mobile application uses game mechanics to compare real energy usage to friends and neighbors, making energy efficiency social, fun and simple while addressing an $11 billion-a-year problem for utilities. SocialEngine turns any company into a “social engine” through an array of products. Their flagship product, a downloadable social networking platform, is in use by over 7000 customers today. The newest addition to their toolset is a recommendation engine that gives tactical and practical suggestions on what to post, who to follow, what to read, what to reply to — in effect turning anyone into a social media guru. TruantToday instantly contacts parents when students skip school, bringing students, and funding, back to the classroom. Current truancy products contact parents too late, at the wrong locations, or in a non-native language to the family. Because TruantToday contacts parents instantly, they have the ability to return the student back to the classroom and keep funding in schools. TruantToday is founded by Zak Kukoff, the 16 year old who is the youngest founder ever to participate in TechStars (and yes, he does plan to go back to school while operating the startup). Latest headlines delivered to you daily This past June, we noted that Instagram hit a big milestone: 5 million users. At the time, the total number of photos shared on the service was at 95 million, and given the rate of growth, they expected to pass 100 million shortly. Well, they missed pointing out that milestone, but today, not even two months later, they’re pointing out another one: 150 million photos. That’s 150 million photos uploaded to Instagram in just the 9 months since the app launched. For comparison’s sake, it took Flickr nearly two years to hit 100 million total photos on their service. Incredibly, Instagram is now seeing 1.3 million photos uploaded each day — that’s a rate of 15 photos per second. The service is now well past 7 million users, Instagram co-founder Kevin Systrom tells us. Again, that’s up over 2 million in under 2 months. Without any sort of strategic promotions, they’re grown to become a mainstay in the top 25 free app in Apple’s App Store. Yes, Flickr may now be well past 5 billion photos, and Facebook can see 750 million photos uploaded in one crazy weekend, but remember that Instagram is still only available on one platform: iOS. Every single one of those 150 million photos has been uploaded from an iPhone (and to a much lesser extent, iPod touches and iPads). You can’t yet use Instagram from any other devices, and you can’t even upload photos from your computer. And while Android support will come, the experience is going to remain predominantly a mobile one, Systrom says. One more crazy stat: Systrom says that of the 150 million photos, 80 percent have had filters applied to them. And of the remaining 20 percent, plenty of those originate from other iPhone camera apps with their own filters. Oh, and don’t forget Bieber. Above, find the 150 millionth photo from user janefot. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Whose tweets lead to more actual sales, Ashton Kutcher’s or Kevin Rose’s?  The answer is not immediately obvious.  Kutcher boasts 7.3 million Twitter followers to Rose’s 1.3 million, but a recent promotion run by design shopping site Fab.com suggests that raw numbers don’t always translate to more sales.   Both Kutcher and Rose recently tweeted out a link that gave their followers $10 off any purchase at Fab.com.  Fab wrote a blog post about the marketing test.  Kutcher’s link resulted in 5,888 signups, more than Rose’s 4,356 (but not much more).  But Rose’s links resulted in more orders and higher revenues.  More of Rose’s followers passed the link along, and they also ordered more.  On the first day of the promotion, Kutcher’s followers placed 45 orders, compared to 30 for Rose’s followers.  But daily orders from Kutcher’s followers peaked at 75, whereas Rose’s peaked at 158 a week later (see chart, Rose’s is the yellowish line).  In terms of total sales, Rose brought in $7,121 versus only $2,183 for Kutcher. These are exactly the kind of metrics more startups should be reporting.  They get at the value per share, and are much more useful than the usual vanity metrics startups put out all too regularly.  Both Kutcher and Rose are investors in Fab, which recently switched from being a gay social network to a shopping site. Using celebrities to promote sales is a growing trend in social commerce.  Gilt recently tapped into Lady Gaga fans and One Kings Lane did a promotion with designers from a Bravo show.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Airy Labs, a startup building mobile, tablet and browser games with an educational twist for young children, has landed $1.5 million in seed funding from Google Ventures, Foundation Capital and Playdom founder Rick Thompson. Airy Labs says it wants its social games to come with genuine learning value that parents will approve of.  The company is part of StartX (formerly known as SSE Labs), a Stanford student startup accelerator. The startup was founded in 2011 by a genius by the name of Andrew Hsu.  Check out this guy’s resume: Hsu who started molecular biology research at a University of Washington (UW) lab at age 10, won the grand prize at the Washington State Science and Engineering Fair at 11, matriculated at the UW at 12, and graduated with three bachelors of science degrees at the age of 16. At age 19, he was a 4th-year Ph.D. candidate in the Neuroscience Program at Stanford University when he left in early 2011 to pursue his startup dreams. He was recently named a Thiel 20-under-20 Fellow. He is also the author of several books, and once a competitive swimmer. Latest headlines delivered to you daily 6Scan, a company building a website protection suite that comes with automatic detection and fixing of security vulnerabilities, today announced that it has raised an undisclosed amount of capital from YL Ventures, a venture capital firm that invests primarly in Israel and Europe.  I’m told that the round was your ‘typical Series A’ size, and that the company graduated from Venturegeeks, an Israeli Y Combinator clone, where it got its initial funding in April 2011. The company’s product is still unreleased, but from what I’ve gathered 6Scan will offer a tool that basically functions like a white-hat hacker, monitoring sites for known and unknown threats, that is also able to automatically plug security holes while it’s at it.  The product was designed specifically for website owners with no technical or security knowledge, and will be priced at $10 per month. YL Ventures managing partner Yoav Andrew Leitersdorf has joined the 6Scan board of directors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last month, we wrote about Vibedeck, which had just raised $2 million in funding for its eCommerce platform for musicians. As we wrote then, though VibeDeck is still in early development (having launched in beta 2 months ago), it’s value proposition is that it’s slick and easy to use. And the startup’s goal is simple, too: To be a low-cost eCommerce resource for small to medium size bands — or musical startups or mSMBs, if you will.  VibeDeck does this by giving artists customizable landing pages, where they can add band info, images, and make use of an embeddable player to share their tunes, in which they can drag and drop tracks to reorder etc. The platform also allows musicians to export sales data and connect their account to PayPal in order to receive payments directly from fans. And the best part is, beyond PayPal fees, VibeDeck is free to use. After our prior coverage, quite a few commenters expressed their frustration with current direct-to-fan solutions. More mature services, like Bandcamp, offer direct-to-fan merchandise sales as well, but BandCamp, in particular, is a bit more focused on adding features that will make it equivalent to a web version of a band manager, whereas VibeDeck is solely focused on becoming an eCommerce solution.  As commenters pointed out, VibeDeck has a ways to go before it has the same functionality as other music services, but in keeping it simple (and remaining free), it has some great potential. Every day fans and musicians are always looking for services that keep prices low. And today VibeDeck added another piece of the puzzle by deploying a SoundCloud integration that will allow any SoundClouder to sell tracks directly to fans (or give away music for free in exchange for email data, if they’re cool like that). This new feature also enables fans to buy MP3s (along with metadata and artwork) as SoundCloud “sets” directly from a SoundCloud user’s page. It’s a quick, 3-step purchase process, and payments flow directly into the artist’s PayPal account. And, thankfully, VibeDeck doesn’t take a cut of those sales. The set-up process produces a free VibeDeck page as a by-product (an example of which you can see here), and pricing is up to the user’s discretion. However, there is an email-for-media option for those musicians that would rather distribute their music for free in exchange for building an email list. VibeDeck CEO Lior Shamir said that he sees this integration as a quick and easy way to add an eCommerce layer on top of SoundCloud’s audio foundation. This is especially relevant considering the fact that SoundRain (which offered a similar service) is no longer live. Readers can test out the SoundCloud integration here. The fact that payments flow right into PayPal, and that bands can connect their VibeDeck accounts to Facebook and embed their VibeDeck-powered music store on any website — plus the bonus that VibeDeck standardized the download type (320kbps MP3) to meet the expectations of Amazon and iTunes consumers — the startup is beginning to look like it has some serious potential. VibeDeck still has some work to do, but offering a solution in which artists keeping 100 percent of profits? That’s music to the ears.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile app analytics firm Flurry has released a report today that examines the use of mobile dating apps vs. online dating sites. Flurry used data from Compete, comScore and Alexa to measure internet consumption of dating sites and used its own analytics data (which now tracks over 90,000 mobile applications) for mobile tracking.  With respect to dating, Flurry tracks a large set of dating apps with more than 2 million total users. Flurry reports that mobile dating apps command more time compared to online dating sites. On average, 8.4 minutes are spent in mobile dating apps vs. 8.3 minutes online.  And a year ago, people spent twice as much time on the Internet for dating as they now do in mobile apps. Mobile dating app usage has grown from 3.7 minutes in June 2010 to 8.4 minutes in June 2011. This is further evidence that supports Flurry’s recent report on mobile app usage dominating web browsing.   In terms of engagement, Flurry says that the frequency of consumers checking mobile dating apps contributes to the growth in time spent per day in mobile dating apps.  Last year, the average user opened a dating app 2 times per day, a little under 2 minutes each time.  Now consumers open a dating app over 5 times a day, but for shorter periods of time, about 1.5 minutes per session. In terms of unique users visiting sites v.s mobile apps, Flurry finds more people are using dating apps on smartphones than visiting online dating sites are on the web, proportionally.  Flurry measured this by looking at the proportion of unique users of dating services versus the total, per platform.  For the Internet, Flurry compared unique visitors of online dating sites versus the total number of people using the Internet, which totaled 12% in June 2010 and 13% in June 2011. For mobile apps, Flurry compared unique users of mobile dating apps versus all apps, which resulted15% in June 2010 and 17% in June 2011. And the report shows that the number of people using dating apps is growing faster than the number using all apps. Overall, the number of unique users of all applications increased 125%, year-over-year, while the number of unique users using mobile dating apps increased by 150% over the same period.  For background, Flurry found the top dating apps and sites are Match.com, eHarmony, PlentyOfFish, Zoosk, Jazzed Online Dating, Skout, and Grindr.  Considering this data, it seems that there’s a huge market opportunity in mobile dating and incorporating local and location-based functionality. And it’s a trend that startups such as LikeALittle has caught onto.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily CampusBookRentals.com, a company that lets customers from nearly 5,600 college campuses rent textbooks online, this morning announced a round of growth financing with total equity and credit facilities raised of over $20 million.  The company, which competes with venture-backed Chegg and BookRenter.com, among others, says it is growing like gangbusters, having recently moved into a new 57,000 square foot facility to support its growth to over 100 current employees (up from 30 a year ago). CampusBookRentals.com, which was started from CEO Alan Martin’s basement back in 2007, says it has been profitable since shortly after its inception and that it has enjoyed triple digital revenue growth of late. The company recently added Scott Klossner, COO & Financial Officer at Backcountry.com, to its board of directors.  CampusBookRentals.com lets student search for books by ISBN, title, author or keyword and offers free shipping to and from their home or college dorm. Admirably, for every book rented the company donates a portion of its proceeds to Operation Smile, a non-profit organization dedicated to providing cleft lip correction surgeries for children in need. The financing round was led by Level Equity, Five Elms Capital and Cherokee & Walker.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Customer support startup Zendesk going after enterprise clients with the launch of a new solution that is tailored to large organizations. Launched in 2008, Zendesk offers a web-based, SaaS-delivered help desk/support ticketing application that gives companies a simple way to manage incoming support requests from end customers.  Zendesk’s new enterprise grade features include unlimited internal usage, so large customers can enable company-wide insight into service operations. The company has also created a specialized platform for parent companies with multiple brands that can centralize their support teams while maintaining branded customer facing support portals. Organizations can also customize permission levels for a group of agents by allowing or restricting access to specific features within Zendesk, such as access to private comments orchannels, or ability to change ticket fields. And customer support interactions can be automatically archived.  To date, Zendesk has added more than 10,000 customers. The company says some of these clients are large companies, but this is the first time that Zendesk is offering a plan and platform that is specifically tailored to meet the security and scale needs of an enterprise-level company. Pricing for the enterprise plan starts at $99 per agent.  Zendesk has raised $26 million to date from Matrix Partners, Benchmark Capital and Charles River Ventures.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily New York City-based file-sharing startup, Minus, announced today that it has raised $1 million in seed funding from IDG Capital Partners, which the startup plans to use to expand its team and to invest in technology and infrastructure with the goal of creating a simple and universal sharing experience for its users. There are a plethora of tools out there one can use to share files, from Skype to email, Dropbox, Box.net, and Ge.tt to WeTransfer. The list is long. We covered Sendoid a few months back, a Y Combinator grad offering a cool peer-to-peer, browser-based solution. In light of a crowded space, Minus’ value proposition is that it works on virtually any web-connected device and supports nearly every type of file you can think of.  With Minus, users can easily and quickly share photos, documents, music, videos, etc., simply by visiting Minus.com and dragging the file they want to transfer onto homepage. Once the file uploads, the user receives a shortlink, which they can then share on Facebook, Twitter, Google+, in an email, IM conversations, and more. Minus is also free to use and doesn’t require users to register in order to upload and share files.  That being said, while users can take advantage of unlimited uploads and downloads without registration, there is a 25MB per file limit. If one registers and signs in, which is free, the limit lifts to 100MB per file. Minus Co-founder and COO John Xie tells me that, as the startup scales and gains its legs on the backend, he and co-founder and CEO Carl Hu plans to increase that limit even more. (The site launched in private beta back in October.) But what’s nifty about Minus is, beyond the easy shortlink sharing (min.uses), that you can drag 100 files at once into the web interface and let them simultaneously upload. While you can’t send gigantic files, and with the 100MB limit you probably won’t be uploading any lengthy videos, a user could presumably upload and share hundreds of images, and then give those links to a few hundred people to browse and download. (Minus also has a “Download as zip” function, which zips your links for you on the fly. Example here.)  Xie told me that, beyond prioritizing scaling, the team wants to keep Minus simple, both in UX and UI, and continue to focus on the sharing aspect of the platform. Since Minus is cloud-based, registered users can create a profile so that once they upload their images, documents, etc., they’re hosted on Minus in the same way Flickr, Dropbox, Scribd and so many others do it. You can check out an example of Xie’s hosted files page here. And, since launch, Minus has seen some good traction. The platform is currently serving 50 million downloads each month, according to Xie, and has just north of 500,000 monthly active users. What’s more, while Minus may be entering a crowded space with plenty of competition ahead, clearly the team’s resolve is there: Originally hosted on the Min.us domain, the team recently purchased the Minus.com domain for about $115,000. So, for those hoping for a Google-, you’ll have to look elsewhere, Minus isn’t budging.  And for those curious as to what’s powering the startup’s cloudy backend: The platform is built on HTML5 and fully deployed on Django stack on Amazon’s EC2/S3, and the team is currently building their own custom CDN solution for serving the needed bandwidth. Developers are welcome. Minus is currently available for Windows, Mac, and Ubuntu in desktop app form, has both Chrome and Firefox extensions, as well as a Chrome app, and is available on mobile for Android. Mobile iOS and Windows apps are currently in beta, with updates coming soon. More on apps here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Move over American Idol, and move over Survivor? There’s a new reality show (okay, documentary-reality series) in town, but luckily no one’s getting voted off the island. In this tech TV version, it’s startups and their founders iterating, scrambling through feature sets, and competing for the affections of investors. It’s a great premise, as the reality surrounding an early-stage startup can be a kinetic one: It may not quite be the car chase in Bullitt, granted, but it’s certainly tense, fast-paced, and, if founders play their cards right, can have significant bearing on the future success of their company (for the better). But, by and large, the early evolutions of startups — and the role that the big technology incubators have in fostering this growth — happen behind closed doors. Or in low rent, shared office space, with lots of empty pizza boxes. Now, thanks to a partnership between TechStars and Bloomberg TV, all eyes will get a comprehensive peek at what it’s like to be on the founding team of a startup going through the gauntlet at a top technology incubator. This “reality-documentary” miniseries, called “TechStars”, will premier on September 13th at 9 p.m., with the six episodes running through October 18th. It will air on Bloomberg TV, both on cable and the web. As to the participants: The series will feature the eleven startups that participated in TechStars’ New York City program, which ran from January of this year through early April and includes OnSwipe, Immersive Labs, Nestio, Veri, ToVieFor, Shelby.tv, RedRover, MigrationBox, CrowdTwist, FriendList, and ThinkNear. David Tisch, Managing Director of TechStars in NYC and David Cohen, Founder and CEO of TechStars, who are both featured in the show, tell me that viewers can expect a real glimpse into what it’s like to be a TechStars company: “Everything is 100 percent real and representative” of what it’s like to be a part of the incubator. TechStars had been approached by several networks looking to do reality-type shows on the incubator, but ultimately chose Bloomberg TV, they said, for the reasons cited above. They wanted it to be an objective, fact-based series that captured the actual essence of what it’s like to be a founder going through an incubator, rather than something that’s over-produced and skewed in favor of dramatization. Bloomberg seemed the right fit. Of course, that being said, both Cohen and Tisch assured me that there will be some drama — startup drama, of course. Yes, there will be a few pivots. But, not to overstate: This will hopefully be an “objective” look at what it’s like taking an idea to execution, developing a workable business model, finding users, and discovering the best way to pitch to investors. Viewers can also expect to see cameos by many of the TechStars mentors in NYC, including Foursquare Founder Dennis Crowley, Fred Wilson of Union Square Ventures, Jeff Clavier of SoftTech VC, Chris Dixon (Founder Collective, Hunch), Alexandra Wilson (Gilt Groupe), Gary Vaynerchuk and “dozens more”. You can check out the TechStars mentor list here. What’s more, it should also be interesting to watch as Bloomberg TV’s board of judges, along with Cohen and Tisch, and many of the TechStars mentors dissect business models and offer startups and their founders pointed criticism and advice as they move through the program, reality-show style. All eleven of the startups make an appearance in the series, though some are on camera more than others. TechCrunch has covered a few of these companies, which you can check out here for OnSwipe, Nestio, Immersive Labs, Veri, and ThinkNear. Seven of the eleven TechStars Winter Program startups have also gone on to raise funding, with a few more soon to close, Tisch and Cohen said. So, there could be a good demo day finale in store. As long as it’s better than the last episode of The Sopranos, I’m in. Applications for the Boston winter program and NYC spring program are open now, and you can apply here. For the “TechStars” trailer, look out, video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily I was approached by a startup that is today launching Drippler, a service that lets people get custom updates (think news, tips, support and more) about the gadgets they own and love, or want to own and love.  I liked the idea at first, even if it sounded a whole lot like the original premise of gdgt (our launch coverage) before they – wait for it – pivoted. Drippler is basically a free website / mobile application that provides consumers with personalized updates about consumer electronics, ranging from smartphones to ereaders and gaming consoles.  Their aim is to become a centralized hub for gadget lovers and cravers to find news, rumors, tips and tricks, tech support, apps, accessories and whatnot. The company has raised $250,000 in seed funding from investors like Reuven Agassi (founder of Top-Tier, acquired by SAP), Yanki Margalit (founder of Aladdin Knowledge Systems) and David Assia (founder of Magic Software Enterprises). Here’s the thing though. Drippler takes content from sources like tech blogs and gadget review sites and attempts to hijack the conversation on their own website. They link to the source, but don’t consistently mention the name of the source, nor its logo, nor the name of the author. In my mind, this isn’t any better than all those auto-rebloggers us tech bloggers need to deal with. Drippler co-founder and CEO Matan Talmi sees things differently. He posits: We think of it as another layer between the users and the content, which collects the relevant content, thus providing more traffic and exposure to the sources and value for the users. We always link to the source and actually get many requests from sites to add them as a source, and we only use syndicated content, so the sources always have control on how much of the content is used. Kind of like Google News, only specializing in gadgets. Except sites like Google News and Techmeme are aggregators and go out of their way to attribute content to the author or publication. Drippler instead attempts to hijack the conversation by letting users comment on, favorite and share articles as if the content were theirs. In short, I like the idea behind the service, but don’t agree with the way they’re going about it. Thoughts?  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Generally speaking, video producers have a much easier time producing content than monetizing it. This is because the monetization side of the equation has two x-factors that are hard to get right. The first being the ‘with what to monetize’ factor–that is, the mechanism that facilitates the billing aspect of the user-flow. The second, being the ‘how to monetize’ factor– this being the model(s) under which the content is charged for. Enter Cent2Cent, an Israeli company with a video monetization solution that is versatile enough for both high-end tv broadcasters (NBC is a client), and low-end bloggers. And with over 200,000 paid transactions to date, they might be on to something, too. One immediate benefit with Cent2Cent is that choosing its monetization solution doesn’t require the content owner to bet the entire house on it. By this I mean that monetizing via Cent2Cent doesn’t require the content to be migrated to Cent2Cent’s hosting infrastructure. Content can be encased within a JavaScript wrapper, or for those that want more programmatic control, there are also a SOAP/REST APIs. For those however that do require hosting, Cent2Cent is integrated with Kaltura, so that’s solved as well. And to round off, there are also plugins for Drupal & WordPress. The second key benefit with Cent2Cent’s solution is that monetization options are quite varied. These include: Daily/Weekly/Monthly/Recurring Subscription plans, Pay-per-View, Bundles and Packages, and Metered plans (by number of views, or time viewed). On the face of it, all these options can be overwhelming, but this is where Cent2Cent’s built-in diagnostic tool can assist the content owner make monetization decisions. The module collects viewing data that it segments for insights to be deduced. For example, a content owner can discover that 2% of users viewed more than ten videos, while 5% viewed more than five. Both segments fit more of a subscription model, as opposed to the rest of the users which could be offered only a pay-per-view purchase model. Cent2Cent began its commercial activity in October 2010 and has raised $500,000 from private investors to date. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I think it’s safe to say that Facebook is the leader when it comes to collegiate and high school social networking. I expect that won’t hurt anyone’s feelings. When it comes to meeting people at college, beer is always a good choice, or there’s Facebook, or some may now prefer LikeALittle.  While social networking is essential on any campus, there are also a few tools social networks can integrate to become a more useful resource for students. Take it from CampusBuddy, which offers college students a social platform where they can also access official grade records and view comprehensive reviews about professors, classes, departments, and campuses.  It’s a great resource for high school students looking for a deeper dive into colleges they’re considering, as they can tap into admissions data and real student feedback about prospective schools. Or, because CampusBuddy has official grade records for classes (the platform currently has over 80 million grades from hundreds of institutions), students that are looking to get more information on how difficult certain classes are can view grade trending data with a few clicks. You can read our initial coverage of CampusBuddy here and follow-up coverage here. And since its launch in 2008, CampusBuddy has been seeing some good traction on campuses across the U.S. The startup’s founder and CEO Mike Moradian tells me that, between its website and Facebook app, CampusBuddy is at over 200K monthly active users, with over 1.5 million total, and revenue has quadrupled over the last year. Thanks to this growth, CampusBuddy is launching a new initiative called CollegeBudget, which aims to bring daily deals and group buying to campuses across the country. With the exploding popularity of daily deals, Moradian says, this wasn’t an opportunity to miss. But, more importantly, he thinks that it’s a great way for students to lower the cost of their college experience. In addition to student deals, CollegeBudget is looking to bring social buying to every level of the campus experience, including textbooks and student loans — and one day in the future, potentially tuition. The company is kicking off its public launch with “Back-to-School Palooza”, which will feature over 100 merchants offering deals at 50 percent (and higher) discounts.  There are deals on admissions books, posters, iPhone cases, etc. But it’s only for college students; you have to have a working “.edu” email address to sign up. Since launching in private beta in March, CollegeBudget has already signed up 600K college students from the CampusBuddy platform, and has already saved college students over $1 million collectively. Moradian tells me that he thinks CollegeBudget will be appealing to brands looking to tap into the highly-coveted college-age demographic. The platform also offers brands social media marketing campaigns at no cost, so that merchants signing up to offer student deals receive a YouTube testimonial video made by a college student, as well as social media blasts to CollegeBudget’s 130K-plus Facebook fans and Twitter followers. CollegeBudget also distinctively delivers a complete social media marketing campaign to merchants,with no upfront cost. Merchants who sign up to offer student deals through CollegeBudget receive aYouTube testimonial video made by a real college student, and social media blasts to CollegeBudget’s over 130,000 Facebook Fans and 3,000 Twitter Followers. Here’s an example of the type of YouTube marketing that’s included in the platform. It’s a great resource for college students looking for targeted discounts on the stuff they need while at school, and for brands, they have a built-in access to students, and for CampusBuddy, which was primarily making money through textbook sales, subscriptions and advertising, it will provide another source of revenue. In terms of the cut CollegeBudget will be taking from deals, Moradian tells me that the site is trying to make the experience as easy as possible on merchants and will be flexible on their cut in an attempt to accommodating different industries. But, on average, it will be offering merchants 60 percent. CampusBuddy is fully bootstrapped at this point, the founder says, and isn’t in any hurry to raise, as they’re “big believers” in the bootstrapping method. Which is a breath of fresh air. Oh, and as an addendum: CollegeBudget mobile apps are coming soon. Merchants can sign up to offer student discounts here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Those who resist purchasing an electric car because charging stations are less ubiquitous than gas stations or figuring out how to charge your car at home seems complicated have one less excuse to go green. A new system from British startup HaloIPT allows cars to be charge wirelessly using induction. The wirelessly transmitted power goes to the car’s battery for an ongoing charge, similar to the concept of recharging an electric toothbrush but with a lot more energy. Each car is outfitted with a pad underneath the car that is ready to receive power. The technology could also work for moving vehicles.  The company is partnering with Drayson Racing Technologies to test drive the technology, which harnesses inductive power transfer via transmitters placed beneath the race track.  The cars don’t have to be directly over the transmitters to receive electricity, nor do they have to be parked to receive, so HaloIPT says the system will work even as racers swerve around their competitors.  It’ll be a while before the race car sees the starting line: HaloIPT and Drayson plan to be ready for showtime by the end of 2015. But HaloIPT hopes to use what it learns with Drayson to apply their technology to non race car drivers’ needs.  In the meantime, wireless charging fans can ogle over the stationary model of the system featured in Rolls-Royce’s experimental 102EX Phantom.  The company outlines its vision in this video:Latest headlines delivered to you daily Twitter is partnering with a German company called Brainloop in an effort to more effectively safeguard and increase its ability to share and collaborate on confidential documents. Brainloop offers an online platform that helps companies such as Twitter but also clients like BMW and Nokia protect confidential documents and automatically apply the necessary security policies to files that they’d like to shield from outsiders. Needless to say, we’re not too happy with this recent development. :) The news of the partnership between Twitter and Brainloop comes less than two weeks after reports surfaced about the former raising $800 million in financing in part to help investors and employees to cash out prior to an eventual sale or IPO.  Twitter declined to comment on said reports. In a statement, Twitter VP of Finance Luca Baratta said the company is “excited” to be working with Brainloop and that the company’s protected online workspace solution will help Twitter as it “expands its global footprint”. Brainloop CEO Peter Weger explains what his company does, in a nutshell: “We make it easy for workers, partners, investors, and other stakeholders, whether they reside inside or outside the network, to do their jobs knowing they are complying with confidentiality rules, that their intellectual property is being protected, and best of all, that they don’t have to worry about it.” In short: Brainloop will help Twitter prevent sensitive information from leaking out to people like us. Some of the features available in the company’s document compliance management solution include ‘anywhere, anytime’ web-based access, document sharing with versioning, user access controls, two-factor authentication via SMS PINs, 256-bit encryption and integration with Microsoft and Adobe Rights Management to prevent unauthorized forwarding, printing and saving of documents. Further details of the deal between Brainloop and Twitter were not leaked. Brainloop is headquartered in Munich, Germany and has an office in Boston, Massachusetts (Unites States). The company has raised 2 million euros in funding to date. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In its third acquisition this year, Autodesk, maker of design, engineering and entertainment software, has acquired San Francisco-based Instructables, a popular online community where people can upload, discuss, rate and collaborate on a wide variety of do-it-yourself projects. Terms of the transaction were not disclosed. Instructables was founded by chief executive officer Eric Wilhelm, a mechanical engineer, and launched in August 2005. You can read up on its history here. Here’s how Autodesk, which announced the purchases of online photo editing service Pixlr and simulation software company Blue Ridge Numerics earlier this year, pitches this acquisition: Millions of Autodesk customers around the world are passionate about making things – whether in their professional lives or their personal lives. Instructables will introduce Autodesk customers to a thriving community of like-minded, smart individuals, with whom they can learn and share their personal inspiration or hobbies.  Instructables members will benefit from Autodesk’s scale and powerful design tools, enabling the community to grow and share their ideas with a wider audience. Whether the DIY community that makes Instructables tick will be equally enthusiastic about this acquisition remains to be seen. You can stay abreast of its members’ opinions via the previous link and on the forum post announcing the acquisition (which you can find here). For what it’s worth, Autodesk intends to retain the Instructables brand and says it will continue to operate Instructables.com while preserving its authenticity. This is Wilhelm’s take on the matter: Everyone here at Instructables HQ is absolutely thrilled, because this is going to be awesome for the entire Instructables community.Instructables will still be the same site you love:  we’ll keep the Instructables name and URL, the whole team is staying on, our policies haven’t changed, you still hold copyright to your projects, we’ll still run awesome contests, and the Robot isn’t going anywhere.   However, we’ll now have the resources to make some improvements to the site I know our authors and community will love.  Autodesk gives us the scale and support to grow and improve Instructables, build some great apps, and continue our mission of creating a positive impact on the world.  Everyone on the Instructables team will become Autodesk employees, but we’ll still wear our Robot t-shirts with pride. While members of the MIT Media Lab, Wilhelm and Saul Griffith founded Squid Labs, an engineering and technology company specializing in design and consulting. Instructables started as an internal Squid Labs project, and Wilhelm later spun it  out as an independent company. Instructables subsequently raised funding from O’Reilly Alpha Tech Ventures and Baseline Ventures, among other investors, although I haven’t been able to pin down how much. Update: according to this recent Xconomy profile, Instructables raised “just shy of $2 million”. The article also teaches us that Instructables currently boasts more than 2 million registered users and a collection of 55,000 how-to articles authored by more than 20,000 contributors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nasdaq-listed IncrediMail, which develops and markets email and other desktop software products, is to acquire Smilebox, a U.S. company that develops consumer-focused photo sharing and scrapbook creation tools. Under the terms of the agreement, IncrediMail will pay $25 million, mostly in cash, with additional payments of up to $15 million in earn-out fees if certain milestones and performance based conditions are met. The company says approximately 10 percent of the acquisition consideration will be held in escrow for 18 months. According to its CrunchBase profile, Smilebox raised $14 million in funding since its inception. IncrediMail CEO Josef Mandelbaum in a statement says buying Smilebox allows the company to diversify its product portfolio and increase its premium subscription base. IncrediMail offers a desktop-based email program and a range of add-ons like a browser toolbar and an instant messaging tool. The company also markets PhotoJoy, a free application that let users create personal wallpapers and screensavers using his or her own digital photos. Smilebox, which was founded in 2005 by Andrew Wright, also offers a desktop application that allows users to use personal photos and videos to build ecards, invitations, slideshows, scrapbooks, photo albums and whatnot (see also Animoto, Muvee and Photobucket).  Smilebox says more than 15 million people have installed the software since the service was launched in June 2006. IncrediMail says it expects its new asset to generate cash sales in excess of $15 million in 2012 and be EBITDA accretive in the second half of 2012.  After closing, Smilebox will continue to operate from its Redmond-based offices, which currently employs roughly 50 people. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kimbia, an Austin, Texas-based developer of a Web-based fundraising and event management software solution, has secured over $4 million in a Series B round of financing led by S3 Ventures. Kimbia provides fundraisers, event organizers and social advocates with a Web-based ‘control panel’ they can use to set up and distribute online credit card donation and registration forms. Founded in 2007, the company says its platform is currently used by more than 1,100 customers, including non-profit organizations and political candidates. Earlier investors include Kimbia CEO Daniel Gillett and angel investors from Austin and Houston.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Flush with $100 million in new funding, Square is continuing to grow like a weed in the mobile payments space. After passing the $3 million mark at the end of May, Square is now processing $4 million in mobile payments daily, and is on track to reach over $100 million in transactions in July. And COO Keith Rabois tells us that he expects the company to double this volume by October. In late June, Square raised a massive round of funding, which valued the company above $1 billion. At the time of the announcement, it was revealed that Square was processing nearly $4 million in payments per day, but the company has surpassed that mark a month later. Rabois tells us international expansion is part of the next phase of growth. He expects to initial launch payments capabilities outside of the U.S. in 2012. And iPad usage of Square is on the rise, especially after the company launched a disruptive new iPad app to replace cash registers and loyalty cards. The breakdown in terms of usage are iPad (21%), iPhone (45%), iPod (3%) and Android (31%). In the past year, Square has shipped more than 500,000 credit card readers, is processing more than a million transactions per month. And Square devices are now sold in Apple Stores. Basically, if you didn’t take Square seriously, perhaps you should reconsider. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBen Lerer on Growth and Revenue at ThrillistIn this episode of Founder Stories, Chris Dixon sits down with Thrillist Co-founder and CEO, Ben Lerer (who is also a partner with his father Ken Lerer in Lerer Ventures).  Targeted towards young men, Thrillist is a “platform for guys” that offers “both local and national content and commerce smooshed into one place” says Lerer. Inspired by Bob Pitman’s Daily Candy (Pitman is an early investor in Thrillist), Lerer founded Thrillist a couple years out of college.  Before he figured out that he wanted to create a city guide for guys, he and his co-founder went through a lot of “get rich quick schemes” with the common thread that they knew nothing about any of them.  The only thing they really knew about was “frivolous fun and buying stupid shit.”  And thus Thrillist was born.  A guide for guys with the voice of a national men’s magazine but a local focus. Today, the site has a loyal following of between 3 and 4 million male subscribers, who are highly attractive to brand advertisers but also very hard to reach.  Lerer built the advertising and content business to a respectable 8-figure in annual revenues, but then he looked around at social commerce companies like Groupon and Gilt and thought he could grab a piece of that by setting up parallel commerce businesses and cross-selling to his demographic.  So last year he bought JackThreads, a group buying site for men’s threads.  In January, he layered on a deals business with Thrillist Rewards. Revenues shot through the roof.  Lerer projects Thrillist will reach “about $40 million in revenue this year, almost tripling from last year.”  He now employs 115 people, up from 45 last year.  Not bad for a business based on frivolous shit. Watch previous episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last November, TechCrunch’s own Sarah Lacy sat down with Vineet Devaiah from “social streetview” startup, Phototour.in, which, at the time, had just received term sheets from a number of high-profile U.S. investors and had recently been awarded the “Top Emerging Technology Company of 2010” by Nvidia. The startup was the first international, non-funded, under-20-member company to win the award, according to Devaiah. Since then, Phototour added Academy Award certificate-winner and entrepreneur Bala S. Manian as an advisor (who was honored for “technical achievement” for his contributions to optical technologies used in films, including Star Wars) and has gained more than 47,000 users for the alpha version of its image and panorama crowdsourcing app, “360”, on Android. Users have logged more than 75,000 panoramas in a relatively short period of time, so, considering the rumors that the iPhone 5 will have a native panorama app, sources tell us that 360 might be a candidate for a potential partnership with Android so that it can remain neck-in-neck with Apple. What’s more, today the startup is officially announcing that it is rebranding as TeliportMe and is bringing 360 out of alpha and into the public sphere in ready-to-wear form. For free. Granted, 360-degree panorama apps for smartphones are nothing new. There are quite a few cool apps and gadgets that have these capabilities on the market, like “You Gotta See This!”, Occipital’s 360 Panorama, and Microsoft’s Photosynth, to name a few. In light of this competition, TeliportMe wants to distinguish itself from the field by building a high quality Android app, that works across OEMs. According to Devaiah, panoramic apps tend to be very hardware centric because of their reliance on a smartphone’s camera, accelerometer, gyroscope, RAM, and so on. Because Android relies on so many different OEMs, it becomes a tricky proposition to build a good 360-degree app for Android and is the reason why most panorama apps are built on iOS (thanks to the vertical integration it has with its hardware). Another obstacle for Android is that only about 20 percent of its smartphones have the processing capability of the iPhone, and as panoramic apps require a lot of image processing during photo stitching, many Android phones don’t have enough RAM to make this possible (at least at speed). Devaiah cited the example of a phone like the HTC Wildfire, which has processing capabilities lesser than that of an iPhone 2G. (Burn!) This is where the technology that won the startup the “best emerging tech” award comes into play. TeliportMe is bringing its photo stitching technology to the Android smartphone, which to a large extent negates the issues caused due to multiple hardware configurations, allowing it to function smoothly over 200 models of android phones, the CEO says. (The startup has also built a version of its photostitching app that works on the browser, which it will be launching soon.) So, 360 allows its users to quickly take high quality panoramas, which they can then view on the app’s 3D viewer. Users can share panoramas via Facebook and Twitter, as well as view, comment, and “like” photos taken by people all over the world on 360’s public realtime feed. The app also taps into the phone’s location to allow users to discover other people using 360 in close proximity, using its “Around Me” option. Check out 360 in the Android Marketplace here, and for the 360’s humorous take on “the Google+ guy” dissing other photo apps, check out this video. For more on 360, look out, video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today at Aol West Headquarters, a number of entrepreneurs, VCs, and executives gathered to discuss the state of the mobile industry and mobile technology. After a series of individual panels, the day concluded with the crowd of panelists gathering together for a lively discussion about the future of mobile, current mobile trends gaining legs, as well as what’s missing. Chi-Hua Chien, a partner at Kleiner Perkins, stepped in to give an example of what’s missing in the industry by sharing three particular business models that he’d like to see make their way into the space. In a prior panel, Chien, Skype investor Howard Hartenbaum, and Tango founder Eric Setton, spoke about how closing the “redemption loop” is becoming one of the most important goals in the daily deals space, specifically on mobile. (Something TC’s Erick Schonfeld talked about in a post earlier this week.) Chien pointed out that one of the big goals is to forge a future where a customer can walk into a store, and the merchant will immediately know who they are and what they want — and that someday soon Twitter and Foursquare will be acting in a way akin to a CRM platform for businesses to help make that happen. But, as to the three companies that Chien wants to see, and invest in, for starters, he envisions a killer mobile company offering a completely automated personal assistant — something he said really wasn’t possible to do well “before mobile”. He cited the example of one having dinner reservations with a friend who lives, say, 30 minutes away. The user’s mobile device, thanks to location awareness, knows exactly where they are and how far away they are from the restaurant. What’s more, thanks to the fact they made their reservation on OpenTable, the automated assistant will know exactly what time they planned to meet. But, based on the fact that you’re 30 minutes away from where you’re having dinner, and tapping into a traffic app, they know that there’s congestion on the way. It then might send out an alert to the person you’re having dinner with, or can, in an automated way, message both people to confirm that they’d like to push the reservation back by 30 minutes, make that change, and close that loop with no effort. Part of what’s making that possible now, he says, is the very existence of mobile, but it’s also thanks to the maturity of the platforms that are now being accessed by maturing APIs. The automated personal assistant addresses a need set that couldn’t be solved in an asychronous environment on a desktop. (For those who immediately thought of Siri’s Personal Assistant when reading this, check out the video below.) Secondly, education is a trillion dollar market “that’s completely screwed up”, because it involves millions of children going to sit in a classroom for 7 hours, and it combines three different businesses for the state: the real estate business, the union labor management business, and certification business.  When, in reality, education should be delivered in a realtime basis to students who are learning at their own pace, who don’t have to sit in a room full of 30 people in an antiquated environment — a realtime, mobile solution that’s learning based as opposed to curriculum based. This second idea is a bit more nebulous, but Chien is hitting on an important theme here: How badly American education is in need of disruption and innovation, especially as that would relate to mobile. The third model Chien alluded to was health and fitness. “We all wish that we could lose ten pounds”, he said, and now there’s a device in your pocket that can seamlessly manage its owner (personal assistant theme again), encourage the user to exercise, eat healthier, whatever the case may be. It can truly manage the pace at which you are paying attention to your health, your exercise regimen, and helping you to lead a healthier lifestyle. There’s a huge need here, Chien said, something that never could have been tackled in a PC environment, simply because the overhead of checking a website every day (as opposed to a mobile device that’s portable and always with you) is just unsustainable. It knows what you’re eating, what the caloric intake of that food might be, can advise you against consuming that third ice cream cone, and can tell your heart rate after a 5 mile run. When one combines that with display information designs and notifications optimized for a mobile setting — well, it’s enough to make an entrepreneur water at the mouth.   Afterwards, Schonfeld asked Chien if these were actually three stealth startups that Kleiner Perkins had recently invested in, to which Chien laughed and said, no, but if there are companies out there making these products, Kleiner may very well  be interested. “And those aren’t just dinky features … those are companies”, Chien said. “Those are companies attacking trillion dollar markets.” I also kept hearing a theme of automation in what Chien talked about, and clearly, at least in his mind, (though I think it’s in the minds of many others as well), that automated processes, whether they be customer service, healthy living, or retail processes, are going to be big not just because we’re lazy, but because they help us focus on doing the things we love. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Next Jump, which powers rewards programs for thousands of corporations and credit card companies, has been steadily expanding its platform to offer a more social experience for consumers. For example, the startup inked a deal with LivingSocial to get access to its inventory of daily deals, and allows users to use Next Jump’s WOWpoints to buy deals and merchandise from retailers like Target and Walmart. Today, Next Jump is unveiling another piece of the puzzle with the debut of Ella, an iOS app that allows you to earn and reward WOWpoints for sharing fashion and shopping tips with your friends.  Ella’s iOS app opens up a map of your current location that shows you where fellow Ella users have posted a tip and photo of a fashion item or good deal at a store nearby. If you like the tip, you can comment on the share and reward users with one WOWpoint, which is worth a penny on Next Jump’s rewards platform, OO.com. And when you post tips and photos, you have the opportunity of earnings WOWpoints as well. Essentially Next Jump is attaching a reward to the act of liking a shopping tip. Ella also features the top users who have WOWpoints and share via the app.   You can spend these WOWpoints you accumulate on OO.com, which lists millions of products from more than 30,000 merchants including Target, Walmart, Amazon, and Buy.com. Next Jump says that in the future, Ella will include Facebook Connect so you can access tips from your friends as well. And the company will soon launch similar apps in other verticals, such as travel and restaurants.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily What would Craigslist look like if it was a mobile app?  It might look a little bit like Blockboard, a neighborhood app which is expanding today from its initial neighborhood of the Mission in San Francisco to the rest of the city.  Co-founder Stephen Hood demoed the app at our Mobile First CrunchUp today. It is designed from the ground-up as a neighborhood app through which neighbors can interact with one another.  They can report potholes and graffiti directly to the city, alert each other about crime and vandalism through a Blockwatch, post general observations about the neighborhood, ask their neighbors questions, and post pictures of lost and found items.  The app has the feel of a bunch of neighborhood flyers on your phone.  “Have you seen this dog?”  “Free kitchen cabinet in original packaging on sidewalk.”  “Dropped baby hat.  Blue with pom poms.  Near little star?”  A week ago I asked, where is the best Cuban food in the Mission and received 8 answers (and that was in the private beta).  At some point you can imagine people listing items for sale.   Chief engineer and co-founder Josh Whiting  was actually a former senior engineer at Craigslit.  Before that he was at Delicious, where he met Hood.  There is another Delicious connection in that founder Joshua Schachter is an investor.  The company raised a $1 million seed round last May.  The company renamed itself and retooled the app from its original Blockchallk concept of pinning virtual notes to GPS coordinates.  You can still pin pictures and notes on a map, but that is almost a buried feature.  The app is more about creating a community, but one that is grounded in your real neighborhood.  You pick your neighborhood, which limits the posts and other neighbors you see in the app to that micro-community.  In a day and age when people no longer talk to their neighbors, much less know who they are, maybe it will take a mobile app to make people good neighbors again.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Well, this is a potentially huge partnership.  After extended negotiations, Groupon deals will finally start to appear in Foursquare.  And it’s not just the normal daily Groupons that will appear, but also the newer mobile Groupon Now deals.  The inclusion of instant Groupon Now deals sets this partnership apart from the other daily deal partnerships Foursquare announced earlier this month with LivingSocial, Gilt City, zozi, BuyWithMe and AT&T. Those specials are all for regular daily deals which cannot be purchased immediately.  You need to buy the deals, but cannot redeem them until after all the deals have been sold that day.  That is just how daily deals work, which makes sense when you are buying them from your computer.  But when you are looking for deals nearby on your mobile phone, you want to be able to redeem them spontaneously.   Groupon Now is designed to do just that.  These are mobile deals available in its own apps, as well as through distribution partnerships with other mobile apps such as Loopt, and now Foursquare. Groupon Now deals are now available in 25 cities, and they will appear in Foursquare alongside other specials and daily deals from other partners.  But the fact that they can be redeemed instantly will set them apart.  They also close the redemption loop and will allow better tracking of deals because Groupon knows exactly how many deals are redeemed and when (as opposed to just knowing how many vouchers have been sold).   These are exactly the kind of deals that make sense within the context of Foursquare.  By partnering with an established mobile app that has been downloaded more than 10 million times, Groupon gets instant distribution.  (Seriously, how many of you are going to download the Groupon Now app?).  People use Foursquare for other reasons, and now they get to see deals also as an added bonus.  It’s a good way to introduce these new types of deals and gradually expand them. So why didn’t Foursquare announce Groupon back when it did the other partnerships with LivingSocial and the rest?  The hold-up was that Foursquare requires Groupon and all partners to consume Foursquare’s APIs rather than the other way around.  From what I can gather it was a bit of a butting of platforms.  But it’s all good now.  Foursquare also had to do a little engineering work to add a “redemption window” for deals that are only good for a certain time if day such as many Groupon Now deals.  Expect to see other Foursquare specials take advantage of that redemption window soon. Foursquare’s business development director Tristan Walker will be speaking today at our Mobile CrunchUp in Palo Alto.  Now I know what I’ll be asking him. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Seattle-based PressOK Entertainment, a game development company, launched an interesting new service this week in public beta called PlacePlay, which the startup describes as a “location enablement platform” for games. Location is something that hasn’t really been explored much in gaming as of yet, so simply put, PlacePlay aims to tackle the obstacles that prevent location from becoming a relevant facet of the games we play every day.  For starters, the platform is focused on giving game developers the ability to quickly add local tournaments into gameplay, so that a user can, for example, play a virtual game of Battleship with other players that live on the same block. Though tournaments are the primary feature of the platform at this point, PlacePlay also supports location-based virtual goods, objects, achievements, and more. PlacePlay is targeting Apple iOS as its main platform, but it just so happens that Apple prevents mobile developers from displaying location-based advertising in apps if they don’t include location based features. Happily for developers, because PlacePlay gives them easy access to location-based features for gameplay, developers also have the ability to take advantage of integrated local advertising networks to not only drive more engagement via in-game activities like tournaments, but also gives them access to higher ad revenue from targeted local advertising. PressOK CEO and Co-founder Ryan Morel says that the simple truth is that it’s much easier to drive consumer action as part of gameplay than to drive action outside of gameplay, i.e. implicit user behavior versus explicit. In other words, if game developers were to add no reward for a user to join, say, a game’s leaderboard (other than it being free), but added incentive for users to play in certain locations (like free level packs for completing location-based challenges) — engagement is still going to be much higher in leaderboards, which are implicitly part of gameplay, rather than actions that are not. There’s less friction for a consumer to participate in a local tournament than there is to get them to take some specific action at a specific place or time. When it comes to appeal for advertisers, it’s hard to find location-based games that overcome these challenges and still have a large enough user base to be relevant, he says.  In allowing third party developers access to PlacePlay’s SDK, the startup hopes that it will be able to collect data from a large number of users, across a wide set of games, by integrating features gamers love (like leaderboards, tournaments, virtual goods, etc.) around location. In the short term, Morel says, PlacePlay will monetize through integrated local ad networks, and longterm the startup plans to monetize through direct deals with brands and sponsors. Widespread distribution of its SDK among game developers will obviously be key if this is to happen.  Thus, the value proposition for PlacePlay is that it allows developers to drive both engagement and revenue; based on early testing, PlacePlay increases end-user engagement by 1.6-times and offers eCPMs of up to $20 — which should be music to the ears of game developers.  The startup is bootstrapped at this point, but it has already begun working with developers like Joybits and Brisk Mobile, and is in the process of converting more.  For another gaming startup making some cool strides in location-based features, especially in regard to gaming check-ins, check out our recent coverage of Heyzap. For more on PlacePlay, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Have you noticed an uptick in the number of Tweets that mention Spotify, Turntable.fm or other music services lately?  It’s all part of their diabolical plans.  Online music services live or die by word of mouth, which is why most of them have hooks into Twitter and Facebook for users to share invites and the songs they are listening to.  But which ones are winning the battle of the music tweets? Social media analytics company Simply Measured looked at a one week sample of tweets linking to one of three music services: Spotify, Turntable.fm, and Pandora.  It found that 51 percent of the Tweets linked to Spotify, 26 percent to Turntable, and 23 percent to Pandora.  So at first blush, Spotify seems to dominate.  But if you strip out invite tweets, it’s a different picture altogether.  Since Spotify launched in the U.S. a couple weeks ago, people have been flooding Twitter with invite links. Take those out, and it’s share of remaining tweets is only 2 percent.  Turntable comes out on top with 52 percent of the tweets, followed by Pandora with 46 percent.   What this data suggests is that Turntable.fm is still a very strong early adopter addiction.  And it too is still in a limited beta.  Yet its users tweet out more than Pandora’s.  turntable user share the songs that they DJ, with 40 percent of its tweets falling into that category. Finally, Turntable users have an average Klout score of 34, compared to 32 for Pandora users and 29 for Spotify, suggesting that its users are more influential on Twitter, at least according to Klout.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily With the recent success of StockTwits, the market seems to be showing that there’s ample demand for a social micro-blogging service that targets stocks, trading, and financial information. Or at least that’s what Stocial is hoping. The Seattle-based startup, which is launching today in public beta, wants to be, in conception, the love child of StockTwits and Yahoo! Finance — or, said another way, Bloomberg for the people, by the people.  Essentially, Stocial wants to give its users access to realtime market data and trending stock sentiment in a virtual and “game-ified” venue. Of course, most tickers are capable of the those first two, and StockTwits has certainly shown that Twitter can be a great resource for realtime financial information. But Stocial Founder and CEO Fahad Kamr says that, with its 140-character limit, Twitter doesn’t embody the full potential for sharing stock information.  Stocial wants to incorporate the Twitter feed, but go a couple of steps further, by giving users access to the top stories from Business Insider, the Wall Street Journal, Fortune, Bloomberg, etc., all curated in a live feed. So users not only have their Twitter feed but a social feed, where they can see information coming in from friends and followers, as well as a “Stock Pick” feed that tracks, you guessed it, which stocks people are picking and sharing on Stocial. More feeds equals more engagement. Users can also customize their Stocial stock platform to view news and trends for the overall market, or for specific stocks, keep watch on those stocks, or create circles of experts and follow top investors on Twitter and Stocial, as well as experience news and tweets in realtime or by top items. And much of its infrastructure is powered by Echo, so it’s all scalable and realtime. But, perhaps the best part is that Stocial offers “contests” in which its users can win cash and, eventually, even land a job. In these contests, users get to pick stocks, go long or short, and pick their price. Contests generally last for two days or a week, at which point the winner receives $50 in cash. And, eventually, $100 and more. Stocial is thus incentivizing its users by offering a carrot at the end of the string. The startup is currently working with investment firms and banks to source top trading jobs. So, as the startup allows its users to collect badges and lift their reputation score on the platform by picking stocks, interacting, and sharing, when one reaches a high enough level of engagement, the user becomes eligible for a nifty prize: An interview at one of those top firms.  While startups like Zecco are taking new approaches to social stock trading by offering users the ability to trade in real markets — on Facebook in the Zecco’s case — Stocial is instead focusing on virtual trading. Rather than be a site where users can trade in real markets (and there are plenty of these), the Seattle startup wants to be a resource for personalized content, a training ground for users looking to jump into real markets.  To make trading stocks less scary, Stocial created a simple virtual stock trading platform. Stocial only focuses on making stock picks, or, in other words, make forecasts over where the stock may be headed, taking portfolios and the risk-laden aspect of speculation out of the equation. At its core, stock trading can really feel like a game, but of course, when you’re playing with real money, it’s anything but. Thus, with its virtual stock market, Stocial seems positioned to take advantage of the inherent game-ification in trading, yet without the risk and plus the rewards. The Stocial value proposition, at least in comparison to StockTwits, is that the startup offers realtime, personalized financial news curation, and allows users not only participate in stock conversation via Twitter, but also via the platform in threaded comments (that look a lot like Facebook comments). Like StockTwits, Stocial is also going after social discovery, by allowing users to discover new friends and experts based on the stocks they’ve selected. It also incorporates your existing social circles, so that when a friend on Facebook joins Stocial, users will immediately be alerted. Currently, Stocial’s team of four is in the process of testing the viability of its business in the space, and is fully bootstrapped at this point, though it is looking to begin raising its first round of investment in the coming months. TechCrunch readers can grab early access to Stocial’s beta here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The news never sleeps, which is why news sites like TechCrunch are addicted to realtime information.  That addiction extends to the analytical tools news sites use to determine which articles are resonating with people and which ones aren’t.  Today, news sites are getting a special flavor of a tool many already use.  It’s called Newsbeat.  It’s Chartbeat on steroids for news publishers, and it launches in public beta. Chartbeat is like a realtime Google Analytics for sites that shows you exactly what is happening on your site at any given second.  (We swear by it here at TechCrunch, and it even powers the popular posts widget in the sidebar at right).  Newsbeat will be familiar to any Chartbeat user, but it is redesigned to break out social traffic from other types and provides an early warning system for stories that are gaining traction or losing steam. Newsbeat shows the same speed dial that is on Chartbeat which indicates how many people are on your site at any given instant.  But now you can see a color-coded traffic chart that lets you see at a glance how much traffic is coming from social sharing like Twitter, Facebook, and emails (purple bars), direct traffic (orange), other sites (blue) and search (green).  For the social traffic, which typically shows up as direct traffic in Google Analytics and other tools, Chartbeat figures out algorithmically which landing pages are most likely to be direct traffic (like the home page) versus coming from third party social apps (like an article page with a unique URL). Below the traffic chart, Newsbeat shows the most popular stories and pages on a news site with how many readers are on that page, the biggest source of traffic (facebook, Twitter), and an arrow that predicts whether or not it is gaining traction.  You can filter top stories by referring source, so you can see which ones are most popular among Facebook users versus Twitter, LinkedIn, email, or from a specific referring site. Newsbeat also lets you drill down by section or author, and shows how each one is doing across different types of readers.  There is also a tab that shows just Twitter activity, along with selected Tweets linking to articles.  Moreover, access to Newsbeat can be set with different permissions so a section editor can see just their own section or a writer can see just their own stats.   Newsbeat has been in private beta with the Wall Street Journal, Time.com, and Forbes.com, but is now generally available to all news sites and large blogs.  Chartbeat will charge $199 a month for access to the service.  It is working on other customized versions for e-commerce and gaming sites.  The next one will be called Shopbeat. Chartbeat comes out of betaworks, but now occupies its own offices, employs 18 people, and is on track to bring in revenues in the single-digit millions. It raised $3 million a year ago.  The regular Chartbeat service is now tracking 4 million concurrent users across all teh sites that use it, which is up from 2 million just last January.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Part of what makes Instagram so compelling is that it allows any amateur photographer to capture visually beautiful photos on the go. Keepsy, a startup that creates photo albums from Instagram and Facebook photos, is launching the a curated gallery of top Instagram photographers.  As Keepsy founder Blake Williams explains, We’ve heard people describe Instagram as ‘Twitter for photos’ but that is really doesn’t do the application justice. It is so much more than that…We’ve been closely watching the photos coming through our system and the quality is simply stunning. Our aim is to create and curate a space that showcases this creative potential for mobile photography. Keepsy is selecting photographers mainly based on quality of work. In the gallery, people can can discover new artists, hear their stories and techniques using Instagram, as well as buy photo albums of their favorite photographers, including Koci Hernandez, Carli Keine, Kristen Rodriguez, and many others. Another ambition of the gallery is to share some of the life story behind each photographer by giving each artist their own profile page. At the moment, Keepsy is curating photos from around 20 users but will continue to grow the gallery by taking nominations from Instagram users. Williams says that the focus is on keeping the gallery selective and representative of the ‘best of the best’ that Keepsy and other users can find. The gallery includes Instagram power users such as Richard Koci Hernandez, Inked Fingers, Kristen Rodriguez.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily The idea of discovering items, products and locations around you is a challenge that a number of startups and companies are trying to solve, including Foursquare, Gowalla, Yelp and many others. Today, Trover, a start-up that is the brainchild of Expedia and Zillow co-founder Rich Barton, Jason Karas and Andrew Coldham; is launching today as a mobile discovery network where people can share location-specific discoveries of places and things in a visual way. You can download Trover’s iOS app here.  Barton and Karas tell me that the app aims to replicate the feeling of strolling around neighborhood, window shopping, and discovering new things in your location. When you open the app, you can sign in with Facebook, and the app will show you a gris of photographs based on your location.  The first photographs in the grid are those of objects or locations closest to you. The mosaic gives users thumbnails of Instagram-like photos featuring places to see or things to do nearby.  You can snap a picture, create a quick description and Trover automatically tags it with location data. You’ll also be able to see which of your Facebook friends have posted a discovery close to your locations. And you can also follow individuals on the network that fit with your interests (i.e. graffiti spotter, Italian foodie and more). Each discovery has its own profile page where the creator can leave a comment, and location. Obervers can the leave their own observations as well During a limited spring trial, open to Facebook members only, the Trover community attracted more than 70,000 users in 150 countries. The company says that an Android app is currently in development.  Trover is funded by TravelPost, which raised $9.8 million Series A investment from General Catalyst Partners, Ignition Partners and Benchmark Capital.  The immediate comparison upon using the app is that Trover seems like a Yelp meets Instagram meets Foursquare because the combination of observation, location, as well as high-quality photo content. And with the various social integrations, Trover adds an element of intelligence to the app. While there’s no shortage of discovery apps on the market, Trover may be on to something by combining all these elements into one, visually appealing package.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Totango, a realtime platform that allows software-as-a-service (SaaS) companies to better understand their customers, announced today that it has closed a $3.8 million round of Series A funding, led by Pitango Venture Capital and Gemini Ventures. The Israeli startup will use its latest infusion of capital to ramp up hiring and marketing efforts. The company is also officially announcing the launch of its public beta, which aims to enable sales teams to better understand how current customers or prospective customers are using their service in realtime in order to more effectively manage customer conversations and engagement. For now, the service is completely free. Down the road, Totango plans to scale its platform to address the entire customer lifecycle, and will add pricing tiers, but at this point is primarily focused on optimizing the way sales teams, specifically, are interacting with their customers. To accomplish this, the startup allows SaaS companies to track the progress of a prospective customer, of new customers during their early interactions with the service, or of existing customers — in order to better understand each phase of user engagement. Sales teams can get the status of a customer at a glance, segment customers in the pipeline based on their usage profile, like, for example, which modules are being used, when and by how many people, and how much time is spent interacting with those modules.  Totango also offers a “personalized daily digest”, which gives teams a report on how on-track or off-track sales representatives are in onboarding new customers, and suggests actions that can be taken to improve the possibility of a sale. Teams can also view activity pages, which offers account history over the course of a customer’s lifecycle, notifications and alerts of customer status updates, as well as realtime tracking of customer usage during and after trials. But perhaps the most notable feature in the startup’s new public beta is its integration with native Salesforce.com apps, which enables Salesforce customers to continue working within the same apps they’ve grown used to, with the added benefit of a broader set of tools to improve sales outcomes. In that way, Totango presents customer interaction data within the sales team’s existing CRM tools to enable them to more effectively increase free trial conversions, lower customer acquisition costs, and increase retention and renewals. “Most SaaS pricing models are based on subscription or usage, which allows customers to stop using — and stop paying for — the service at any time”, said Guy Nirpaz, CEO and Co-Founder of Totango, via the Totango blog. “That, plus low switching costs, mandates that SaaS companies constantly monitor customer satisfaction and improve the value that is being delivered”. Nirpaz continued on to say that engagement between customers and their SaaS companies remains fairly indirect, with a lack of customer visits, sales calls, and overall interaction. Without this kind of real human-to-human interaction, companies often fail to truly understand their customers, he said. Yet, thanks to the ability SaaS companies have to track and analyze prospects and customers, cloud-based software companies have a leg-up over their traditional counterparts. Thus, the founders have built a series of tools they believe will allow sales teams to increase their effectiveness by improving conversion rates and keeping existing customers happy. For more on Totango, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily When selling or buying a house, working with a trusted, certified broker or agent is extremely important. Generally you find trusted real estate agents through word of mouth, whether that be through a neighbor, friend or contact. But as more and more consumers look online to find and sell listings, sourcing personal recommendations can be challenging. Real estate search engine Trulia is adding new social functionality that aims to replicate word-of-mouth referrals for brokers and professionals in the real estate industry.  Trulia Social Search essentially brings the verbal endorsement of a preferred agent to Trulia and Facebook, helping consumers discover trusted real estate professionals by searching their Facebook social network for agents and brokers their family, friends and acquaintances recommend. Basically the feature allows consumers to recommend their agent on Trulia and Facebook simultaneously.   These agent endorsements then help build a personalized list of recommended agents for fellow consumer as they search Trulia’s Find a Pro directory. When a user searches and logs in with Facebook, they will see any agents who their friends or friend of friends recommend as well as highly recommended agents in the Trulia community.  Recommendations are also published to the agent’s Trulia profile, consumer’s Facebook profiles and their friend’s Facebook News Feeds. On an agent’s page, you’ll be able to see if he or she is recommended by friends, family or a client. Agents can also request recommendations from friends and clients via Trulia.  Trulia says that while some of its competitors (i.e. Zillow) already have ratings for agents and brokers, the company is trying to add a social component to recommendations that creates a greater sense of trust between the client and agent. Plus, Trulia believes that recommendations need to go beyond a star rating, and should include relationship to the the broker/agent, and detail on the interactions (i.e. sold a house, time period, professional manner).  Of course, Trulia’s future is in the spotlight because of the recent IPO of one of its main competitors, Zillow. An an IPO is definitely on the horizon, the company tells us. Trulia, which is profitable, has only raised $32.8 million in funding (by contrast Zillow raised $87 million). Last year, the company acquired geodata startup Movity, and traffic has been steadily growing since last year. In June 2011, Trulia saw 9.1 million unique vistors compared to 5.4 million unique visitors in June 2010, according to comScore.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Brian Chesky is the CEO of Airbnb. In this guest article he discusses the recent Airbnb user safety incident we reported on earlier today. On June 22nd, we learned that the home of one of our San Francisco hosts was vandalized by an Airbnb guest. We were devastated when we received this news. With a single booking, one person’s malicious actions victimized our host and undermined what had been – for 2 million nights – a case study demonstrating that people are fundamentally good. As soon as we learned what had taken place, our first concern was to make sure our host was safe. We have been in close contact with her ever since, and have worked with the authorities to help find a resolution. Because Airbnb facilitates the reservation details and payment information, we were in a unique position to assist with the investigation. While we are not at liberty to discuss the details during the investigation, we understand that with our help, a suspect is now in custody, and our information will now become important evidence. Once our host’s safety was secured, our attention moved to further strengthening our system. Trust and safety are our highest priorities. From the very beginning, we have developed Airbnb with safety and security as the most important innovations in our product roadmap. These features include: As a response to this incident, we have begun development on improvements to increase the safety of Airbnb, including: We are upset that this happened but believe that our platform and staff were able to make a positive contribution to this unfortunate case. The host herself acknowledged our efforts in a blog post when she said: “I would be remiss if I didn’t pause here to emphasize that the customer service team at airbnb.com has been wonderful, giving this crime their full attention. They have called often, expressing empathy, support, and genuine concern for my welfare. They have offered to help me recover emotionally and financially, and are working with SFPD to track down these criminals.” While we’re glad that our host feels this way, we are committed to improving upon our product with safety as the cornerstone of the Airbnb marketplace. We are fully committed to the vision that one day you will be able to travel to any city or town around the world, and with the click of a button, access local people and cultures safely and easily. We will work tirelessly alongside our community until that day is fully realized. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quora has just launched a bundle of interesting initiatives over the past day or so, all signs that the Q&A site is trying to figure itself out. First of all, the company has begun testing something called “Ask to Answer Suggestions” where users start out with a budget of 500 Quora credits (Quoins?) and can offer to pay other users in credits to answer questions. The price for questions will eventually increase or decrease based on answerer’s zeal for answering questions and level of topic expertise. From an email sent out to beta testers (because I’m a TechCruncher I’m not in the beta, nor can I see the Quora FAQ, which I’ve included below). “Since experts only have so much time to answer questions, we are also introducing credits as a bookkeeping mechanism so that incoming requests to a user stay at a manageable level. How It’ll Work:When you use Ask to Answer, you’ll now see other beta testers suggested based on how likely they are to give you a good answer. With your credits, you can ask these users to answer questions. Note, however, that if you and another user are following each other, you can ask each other for free. The number of credits required to ask someone reflects how responsive she is to Ask to Answer requests; to give responsive users who are willing to provide answers more requests, their prices come down while their ranking in suggestions improves.” Note, these credits aren’t something that can be exchanged for cash only for answers to questions. Basically as it scales the company is experimenting with incorporating game mechanics into its processes in order to get people to give more answers. The more and more mainstream/non-tech people join, the more likely it is that questions will go un-answered  because the incentive that makes techies answer questions (esteem within our close-knit community) just isn’t there for a wider audience. Nothing is more depressing than an unanswered question. If Quora power user Semil Shah is currently offering people $100 on Zaarly to answer his Quora question about the most foundational web companies of all time, in-service credits are worth a shot.  In addition and more formally, the Q&A site has also added the option to include location and employment information in user profiles, letting users broadcast social and business information like where they live, go to school and work. The new profiles also allow for Facebook-style status updates, presumably because people were already using the question functionality to post non-questions. Quora designer Rebecca Cox explained the profile changes in a followup post to the one written yesterday, interestingly enough chalking up the profile changes to scaling issues, “Quora is growing and the previous profile wasn’t scaling with that growth. We have a lot of systems in place to provide a good environment for everyone to learn and share, but those same systems can be difficult for people new to the site to understand. If you’re new and are reading an answer or receiving a notification that someone edited your question: You want to trust the answer that is given and knowing something about the person who gave it helps inform that; You want to know why an edit happened and you want to know about the person making that change.” The startup exploded last December and has been rushing to catch up with its success ever since. With these recent steps we’re seeing the beginning of a more quantified user economy emerge, on based on reputation and expertise in providing information. Quora needs some kind of way to identify experts, and is figuring it out through iterating as it goes along. The Quora Credits FAQ, below (btw, if anyone wants to send me a screencap of their credits budget, my email is really easy to figure out. And while you’re at it …). Update:  And we’ve got a screencap.  1. What are Quora Credits? To help users get great answers faster, we’re launching Ask to Answer Suggestions, which help you find the people who are most likely to be able to answer your questions. Now instead of only being able to ask people you know or those whose answers you’ve seen, Suggestions identify people who have related expertise to help you. But since experts only have so much time to answer questions, we are also introducing credits as a bookkeeping mechanism so that incoming requests to a user stay at a manageable level. Everyone starts out with a budget of credits, which can be used to ask other people to answer questions. (For now, only people who are in the private beta will be part of this system). To start, it will cost the same number of credits to ask anyone a question, but prices will change over time to keep the number of requests to a user manageable. Users who are responsive and signal that they enjoy answering questions will see their prices fall, making them affordable to more users, resulting in more requests. Prices increase for users who aren’t answering requests and might prefer fewer requests. 2. How are Quora credits earned? You can earn more credits in a few ways. Answering Ask to Answer requests: You’ll receive credits for answering ask-to-answer requests (an amount equal to your price). Getting upvotes on answers you’ve written: You’ll get credits for any new upvotes (not just from beta users) on any answer or post you’ve written on Quora. An answer you have solicited (via Ask to Answer request) receives upvotes. Credits given to you by other users: Users can give credits to each other whenever they want. Occasional system refreshes: We’ll provide credit refreshes if you go for a while without enough credits to ask the average priced user. 3. How is my price determined? Credits are a bookkeeping mechanism for Ask to Answer Suggestions to ensure that frequently suggested users don’t get inundated with requests. The prices that are set for each user reflect how responsive a user has been to prior requests and have nothing to do with the quality of potential answers. Users who are responsive to requests signal that they are willing to provide answers when asked. As a result, their prices come down while their ranking in suggestions improve to make them affordable to more users, resulting in more requests. On the other hand, prices increase for users who aren’t answering requests and might prefer fewer of them. If you receive numerous requests to answer and do not respond by writing answers, the system increases your price and ranks you lower in suggestions; in essence, it infers that you are too busy to answer or not interested in answering, both of which mean, on average, that we should send fewer requests your way. Two users with the same price may have different levels of expertise, because their prices reflect similar rates of responding to requests. Conversely, two users with similar levels of expertise may have different prices, based on different response rates. 4. What happens if someone does not respond to my request to answer? Do I get a refund? If a user who is asked to answer responds with an answer within a week, he or she receives the price paid by the asker. If the user has not answered after a week has elapsed, or clicks to ignore the request during the week, 75% of the price is refunded to the asker; the remaining 25% is still paid to the potential answerer for having received and considered the request. 5. Why are some users free to ask? If you and another user in the beta are both following each other, you can ask each other questions without having to pay in credits. This is because we assume you are likely to know each other and did not discover each other through Ask to Answer Suggestions. 6. What happens when I interact with users not in the beta? You can request answers from users who aren’t in the beta by typing their name into the Ask to Answer box. These requests will neither require payment nor show up in your credits pages. Similarly, people who are not in the beta test may still ask you to answer questions, too. These will work as they did before except they will not trigger notifications and you will not receive credits for answering these unpaid requests. They will not expire and will appear on at the bottom of your Ask to Answer page with old requests you received prior to the beta. 7. How does giving credits work? You can give credits you have earned at any time to anyone else in the beta. The only restriction is that the amount you have available for gifting is your current balance minus 500 credits. This is to prevent users from creating many accounts and accumulating a huge amount of credits by transferring them to a single account. 8. What happens if I run out of credits? If you do not have enough credits to ask someone to answer, you will not be able to do so. Periodically, users who have fewer than 100 credits will receive a refresh to top them up to 100. For example, if you had 0 credits left before the refresh, you would have 100 after the refresh. If you had 60 left before the refresh, you would also have 100 after the refresh. 9. What are the terms of the private beta? As this is a beta, you can expect the features to evolve and change just like the rest of the site, potentially faster as we get your feedback. If we decide to roll out Ask to Answer Suggestions more broadly, we will cancel the beta credits and issue entirely new credits to all Quora users. We will issue the new credits to beta testers in proportion to the number of beta credits you have at the end of the beta period. 10. I have feedback, questions or bugs to report. What should I do? Please email feedback@quora.com with “BETA” in the subject and describe what happened in details so we can help investigate. 11. Why is Quora introducing credits? Our goal is to help make each question page on Quora a valuable, reusable resource. One part of getting more great answers is helping users find experts who can contribute to each page. We decided to focus now on Ask to Answer suggestions because it is an opportunity to discover great contributors who otherwise might be unknown to you, and also to find out where your expertise is sought. We’ve found that people generally like helping each other, and new Ask to Answer Suggestions are designed to make that easier. In making suggestions prominent in the Quora interface, we have to be considerate of how available users are for answering questions on Quora. Credits allow us to calibrate how many requests a user might get, so that nobody is overwhelmed. Automatically setting the price of asking a user based on that user’s past responsiveness keeps the system flexible and dynamic while removing a complex decision. In developing credits, we’ve thought carefully about the economics — both at the level of each user, and of the system as a whole. Price movements and rewards are designed to help the system quickly reach a sustainable equilibrium, and to make using credits intuitive and fun. As with all theory, we need to see how our ideas work in the wild, and that’s where this beta comes in. We welcome your questions as you use the features, and your feedback about how things can be improved. We have numerous ideas for how we might iterate on the product and look forward to continuing to improve Quora with you. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Important updates to post at end Until now everything has been just great for Airbnb, a service that lets people rent out their homes and become a sort of mini-hotel. The company launched in 2008 and has grown rapidly. They’ve been cloned by the Germans, which is always a mark of success. And they’re now a part of the billion dollar valuation club. Even the clone raised $90 million. Which is all super great. But now the story of a trusting Airbnb user who’s had her home sacked (it’s the only way to describe it) is starting to spread. Airbnb’s response so far has been tepid at best. It turns out that when something like this happens, Airbnb isn’t financially responsible. The facts: Last month “EJ” wrote a long blog post about how a renter spent an entire week carefully robbing and trashing her home. Walls were cut through to get to locked valuables, including her grandmother’s jewelry. They smashed a hole through a locked closet door, and found the passport, cash, credit card and grandmother’s jewelry I had hidden inside. They took my camera, my iPod, an old laptop, and my external backup drive filled with photos, journals… my entire life. They found my birth certificate and social security card, which I believe they photocopied – using the printer/copier I kindly left out for my guests’ use. They rifled through all my drawers, wore my shoes and clothes, and left my clothing crumpled up in a pile of wet, mildewing towels on the closet floor. They found my coupons for Bed Bath & Beyond and used the discount, along with my Mastercard, to shop online.  Despite the heat wave, they used my fireplace and multiple Duraflame logs to reduce mounds of stuff (my stuff??) to ash – including, I believe, the missing set of guest sheets I left carefully folded for their comfort. Yet they were stupid and careless enough to leave the flue closed; dirty gray ash now covered every surface inside. and The kitchen was a disaster – the sink piled high with filthy dishes, pots and pans burnt out and ruined. Comet Cleanser was dumped everywhere; the kitchen counters, wood furniture, my gorgeous new bed frame, my desk, my printer… all were doused in powdered bleach. The death-like smell emanating from the bathroom was frightening (and still is) and the bathroom sink was caked with a crusty yellow substance. Various pairs of my gloves were strewn about – leather, dishwashing and otherwise – I imagine in a weak attempt to cover up fingerprints. Whoever these people were, they were living large and having one hell of a time for an entire week inside my home, unwatched, unchecked, free to do whatever destruction they wished. And damn, did they do a lot of it. The creepiest part of this is that the renter was sending cheerful emails during the week’s rampage: All the while, Dj Pattrson was sending me friendly emails, thanking me for being such a great host, for respecting his/her privacy…. telling me how much he/she was enjoying my beautiful apartment bathed in sunlight, how much he/she particularly loved the “little loft area” upstairs… with an “lol” closing one sentence, just for good measure. It makes me sick to my stomach to think now of these emails. EJ also explains how Airbnb’s policies of not letting people know who they’re renting to until the last moment makes a situation like this more likely to happen. She explains (convincingly) how Craigslist is actually safer because they warn people of the risks. Airbnb, in effect, is vouching for the renter.  Yet now I ask myself this: for what, exactly, did I pay a service fee to Airbnb.com? What did I get in exchange for my 20-something dollars? What was the advantage of using this service over Craigslist, which is free? Ironically Airbnb.com’s site states “the promise of our site is that it is entirely transparent” when in reality, it is not. And therein lies the fundamental, though not immediately apparent, difference: on Craigslist, I am warned loudly and repeatedly that use of the site is at my own risk. I am encouraged to take certain precautions, and I have the ability to do so by gaining quick access to the email addresses, phone numbers, and other identifying information of the person(s) I am communicating with, all of which can be researched and at least somewhat verified by means of basic internet searches. Alternatively, Airbnb.com tightly controls the communication between host and traveler, disallowing the exchange of personal contact information until the point in which a reservation is already confirmed and paid for. By hindering my ability to research the person who will rent my home, there is an implication that Airbnb.com has already done the research for me, and has eliminated the investigative work that Craigslist requires. In effect, the friendly, community-based site with its Golden Rules creates a reasonable expectation that some basic screening of its users has occurred, and speaks little to the risks involved, primarily within the very small print of the lengthy Terms of Service. Thus by the time this reservation was confirmed and I was given Dj’s email address and phone number, I was on a plane heading East, and he/she was armed with my welcoming instructions on where to pick up the keys to my apartment. Airbnb’s response has been diplomatic but tepid. CEO Brian Chesky wrote yesterday: Hey everyone – we were shocked when we heard about this unsettling event. We have been working closely with the authorities, and we want to reassure our community that, with the help of our security infrastructure, we were able to assist the police in their investigation, and we understand from authorities that a suspect is now in custody. We’ve created a marketplace built on trust, transparency and authenticity within our community, and we hold the safety of our community members as our highest priority. We will continue to work with our users to stamp out those who would put that community at risk in any way. The vast majority of our community members genuinely respect and protect each other, but we urge users to be careful and discerning with each other and to hold others accountable through reviews, flagging and our customer service channel. Our hearts go out to our host and we will continue to work with her and with the authorities to make this right. The fact that the police may have arrested the person responsible is great. But EJ’s life has been completely turned upside down by this. I can’t stay here much longer. The feeling of having been violated is overwhelming. The apartment’s energy – once light and airy – now feels thick and disquieting. Suddenly Airbnb’s only FAQ on a situation like this doesn’t sound as witty and fun as it must have before.  Will someone steal my grand piano? Highly unlikely. Grand pianos weigh thousands of pounds and do not fit through doors. I wonder how Airbnb would answer a FAQ question that’s more to the point, like “What if my renter methodically ransacks my home and steals everything of value while sending me cheerful update emails saying how nice everything is?” Probably with something less pithy than before. There’s a very short window of time for Airbnb to deal with this before it may spiral out of their control. Hotel lobbyists are already trying to crush Airbnb before it becomes more of a threat.  I spoke to Airbnb about EJ’s situation. They won’t reimburse her for damages, they say, and they do not insure against losses. They are helping police track down the person who did this, but their help ends there.  The hotel lobbyists couldn’t ask for anything more. Update: I spoke with Brian Chesky. He says the company has offered “to assist financially, find new housing for the host, and anything else she can think of to make her life easier.” He says they intend to “go above and beyond” to make the situation right for her. This is different than what a company spokesperson said earlier (see above). I asked Brian if this sets a new policy, and he responded that they’ll look at it on a case by case basis.  The company also sent this email with corrections: 1) We have been assisting investigators and they have a suspect in custody.  2) We have been working with the host since the event and we have offered to assist her to  the situation to everyones satisfaction. If you read the blog post, you’ll see that she points this out:  I would be remiss if I didn’t pause here to emphasize that the customer service team at airbnb.com has been wonderful, giving this crime their full attention. They have called often, expressing empathy, support, and genuine concern for my welfare. They have offered to help me recover emotionally and financially, and are working with SFPD to track down these criminals. I do believe the folks at airbnb.com when they tell me this has never happened before in their short history, that this is a one-off case. 3) We actually have an entire safety FAQ for our users. You can find it here: http://www.airbnb.com/safety Update 2: Brian Chesky writes about the incident here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Over the past couple of years, push notifications have become a vital part of the mobile picture. There are so many apps, and so much that you can do on smartphones, that you need a system to alert you when something comes up that you’ll want to know about. But these notifications are still not a particularly easy thing for developers to wrap their heads around and implement. That’s why Urban Airship exists. And all of the same things can be said about location. Which is why SimpleGeo exists. So it seems to be a good match that the two of them are hooking up for a partnership. As they’ll announce as OSCON (the open source developer conference) today, Urban Airship and SimpleGeo have signed a long-term strategic partnership agreement. Given the wide-range of services that both companies offer, this could ultimately mean many things. But the core idea is to provide developers with a simple way to offer location-aware push notifications in their applications. What if you enter an area that happens to be near a deal that one of your apps is offering? Such a partnership could make it easy for that app to implement a way to send it to you when it matters most — when you’re there, for example. Or what if it’s a heatwave in your city and an app on your phone can recognize this and send you a message to head somewhere for a cool treat? Those kind of things will be possible. “Location has long been the Holy Grail,” says Scott Kveton, CEO of Urban Airship. “On mobile, the potential is there for sure but thus far execution has been extremely poor. So we have taken our time to make sure we partner with the location experts to align with our vision of real-time, context-aware, personalized push notifications. This will make apps a lot more useful for everybody — marketers, consumers and developers alike,” he continues. Rob Bailey, SimpleGeo’s VP of Biz Dev, cuts right to the heart of why this really matters for both companies though. “Geo-targeted notifications are a massive area for opportunity in revenue for SimpleGeo and Urban Airship.” Such functionality is a big value proposition for a lot of app makers. And many will undoubtedly be willing to pay for it. “We’re very excited to be going after this opportunity together,” Bailey continues. No doubt. The two sides say the functionality provided by the parternship will be rolling out in phases. Phase one will start in Q3 and will see Simple Geo parse location out of Urban Airship’s notifications. This information can then be passed and used through the APIs. Down the road, things will go even deeper, the two sides suggest. As long as Urban Airship keeps making signs like the one above, I’m all ears for anything they have to say. [image via twitter/harryh] Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInStartup Company Founding Tips“What do investors look for in a beta?  What are the key metrics?”  That is the question Omar Tellez poses to Chris Dixon of Founder Collective and Hunch and Josh Kopelman of First Round Capital in this episode of Founder Office Hours  (a special format of Founder Stories we are trying out).  Tellez is the CEO of Sched.it, a social online calendar app getting ready to launch. Kopelman notes that “investors are always tempted and teased by large numbers,” but cautions that any site can manufacture a bump in visitors.  “The real data is retention and repeat usage. Instrument your site to track that data,” he advises.  Services like Kissmetrics and RJMetrics are designed to track different cohorts of users, for instance.   Dixon agrees that focusing on “vanity metrics” will get startups nowhere.  It’s much better to try to understand the “users you lost” and what excites your most engaged users. And don’t be afraid to launch a “minimal viable product” and retool quickly.  “If you aren’t embarrassed by your first product, you have launched too late,” he says.  Learn from your early mistakes, improve the product, stay lean, and keep moving forward quickly. And what about limiting access to the beta to create a sense of exclusivity like at a nightclub?  If you can do that, fine.  But the “velvet rope works for four nightclubs,” notes Dixon, and everyone else has to beg people to come in from the sidewalks. If you enjoy watching Founder Office Hours, be sure to check out the first one with Profitably’s founder and Paul Graham’s Office Hours at Disrupt NYC, the the original inspiration for this show. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInAdSense For Images Pixazza Rebrands As Luminate, Launches Platform For In-Image AppsPixazza, a Google Ventures-backed photo tagging service that has been compared to an “AdSense for Images,” is rebranding as Luminate today, and debuting a new platform for in-image apps.  As we’ve written in the past, Pixazza allows publishers to identify, tag and match products found within online images on their sites and then link them back to the inventories of Pixazza’s network of advertisers. The service, which can be integrated in a site by adding a single line of code, allows consumers to browse the photos featured on a site and mouse over it to reveal information and pricing about similar products, and if desired, click to purchase. Through the company’s network of publishers, Pixazza now reaches more than 150 million unique users per month, and is seeing a rate of 30 billion image views per year. Pixazza currently works with over 4,000 publishers, including US Weekly, Hearst Digital Media and Access Hollywood.  CEO Bob Lisbonne tells us that the rebanding of the company is an effort to convey that Luminate has a vision of making every image interactive, or luminous. Part of that vision is going beyond e-commerce as an engagement in an app, and providing other interactions within an image. Lisbonne explains to us that just as phones evolved from voice calls to smartphones with apps, images will soon provide more interactions beyond just views. So when a consumer sees the Luminate icon in the corner of an image, it indicates that the image is interactive. Consumers can mouse into the image and choose from a variety of image apps. These could include the ability to share an image or link to Twitter, discover statistics about their favorite athletes, see where to purchase similar products to those featured in a photo, access more information about a particular event, read more content about the people or places featured in an image, listen to music or see a movie trailer related to an image. The company;s applications will span a number of categories including commerce, information, social, organization, advertising, navigation, public service, and presentation. Currently, Luminate’s platform offers applications such as Twitter Share, Facebook Share, and Email Share apps that give consumers the power to select what they want inside an image and share it with others; an information app called Annotation that allows publishers to quickly and easily tag any spot within an image and add information relevant to that image; a commerce app called Products, which enables consumers to mouse over the image and interact with tags on the picture; and an Advertising app that offers publishers a way to place relevant advertisements within an image. Luminate plans to roll out an API to developers to create apps for images in the near future.  The startup, which has raised nearly $20 million in funding, faces competition from Stipple, Image Space Media, GumGum and others.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBuddyTV Turns Your iPhone Into A Smarter Viewing Guide And RemoteA couple weeks ago, I went to a hotel suite in Manhattan to get a demo of BuddyTV’s new iPhone app, which hit the app store a few days ago.  In the video above, CTO Bill Baxter takes me through the main features.  He shows me on an iPad for easier viewing, but the app is for the iPhone and soon Android.  It combines a viewing guide on your iPhone, with social features like chat and being able to broadcast what shows you are watching to Facebook and Twitter.  But it also suggests shows for you to watch that are airing now, upcoming, trending, or on your favorites list.  The app works with Google TVs, and eventually will be able to act as a remote with tablets and phones that sport an IR transmitter.  (With Google TVs and Dish set-top boxes it will work over WiFi). The problem it is trying to solve, says founder Andy Liu is that “70% of the time people are watching sub-optimal content.  People turn on TV and end up at Karate Kid 2.”  The BuddyTV mobile app tries to be smart about suggesting what shows to watch. It doesn’t care if the show is on your cable system, Netflix, DVR (if supported) or somewhere else.  It lets you “heart” and rate shows and channels, and then it gives you recommendations base don what it thinks you want to watch.  Perhaps the best little feature is teh ability to go through your program guide and heart just your favorite channels and then look at only those—a feature I begged Verizon TV honcho Eric Bruno to let me do on FIOS TV, or at least on the FIOS iPad app.  The app also pulls in previews, recaps, and other TV trivia from the main BuddyTV site. And you can set reminders for shows you want to watch with notifications on your phone.  (Because you need to be reminded to watch TV).  Here’s a slicker promo video:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nodeable, a startup building a cloud-based social platform for systems data, announced today that it has raised $2 million in series A financing, led by True Ventures. The startup will use this infusion of capital to ramp up hiring efforts and continue building its platform, as it moves into private beta. But what is it about this young startup that has True Ventures excited? Cloud computing and various sources of big data are becoming more and more popular as on-demand resources for businesses, but at the same time, the management of clouds on the back-end is becoming increasingly challenging and messy.  And though no one is asking the cloud to disappear, developers, IT staff, and admins are still largely compelled to interact with these systems on a case-per-case basis. Essentially, each problem requires an ad hoc solution, and really the way these cloud and data systems are managed, and interacted with, has not added the modern look, feel, or approach of newer communication media, like social networks, for example. Thus, Nodeable is attempting to apply social mechanics to systems data in such a way as to enable developers, IT staffs, and more to interact with cloud infrastructure and data just as they would on social networks.  Put another way, Nodeable is Like a Twitter for machines, in that it aggregates systems data from a broad array of sources — co-founder and CEO Dave Rosenberg cites Amazon AMI as an example at the infrastructural level and Github at the data source level — then processes that data, adds metadata or defined messages, before presenting the data in a UI or via an API. Users, he says, can interact with the platform itself by employing social networking mechanics, like tagging, both in messages sent to systems (like @webserver1 restart, for example) or to other users. Much in the same way communication tools like Yammer or Twitter function. Though this does not mean Nodeable is a “scripted automation tool like Rightscale or Opscode’s Chef“, he says, instead the approach is meant to provide a simple way for users to communicate with cloud services — to allow IT staffs to make better decisions, faster. “Ultimately, we are building a platform that sits in the middle of data streams and allows the data to be manipulated”, the CEO told me. “We are trying to apply what Okta does for authentication to system data streams”. Nodeable wants to combine big data analytics, systems management and social communications in such a way that a social layer is added to an analytics platform to give users an interface that feels like a social networking site, but still allows businesses to manage the complexities of data management. Latest headlines delivered to you daily LucidChart, a web-based diagramming application, announced today that it has raised $1 million in seed funding from 500 Startups, 2M Companies, K9 Ventures, as well as several angel investors. The startup will use its new capital to ramp up hiring efforts and to begin positioning its app as a viable alternative to desktop software. On a basic level, LucidChart combines elements of Excel, Photoshop, and Google Apps all in one clean, easy to use application. Whether you’re a developer, a web designer, or just an average web user, LucidChart allows the creatively-minded to create sexy, yet sophisticated graphs, mockups for websites or mobile apps, flowcharts, diagrams, etc. The startup’s application was built on open standards like HTML5 and javascript, and doesn’t require plugins — all the user needs is the love of a good browser. (Here’s a look at LucidChart on the iPad, for an example.) LucidCharts CEO Karl Sun said that he wants the application to be an example of what HTML5 is capable of today, in that the standard is starting to get to a place in its development in which its rendering and display of visual and graphical applications is on par with desktop software. He hopes LucidCharts can help hammer that point home, visually speaking. But, aside from those who are proponents of HTML5, perhaps one of LucidChart’s coolest features is its realtime collaboration functionality. Any number of users can work together simultaneously on creating a diagram or a mockup, with each user’s additions reflected on partner screens in realtime. There’s also a group chat feature to allow users to easily discuss the project in realtime, while saving a few dollars on those phone bills.  Much in the same way Google Apps does for text, LucidCharts is making a play at realtime visual collaboration, and in this way, Sun thinks that LucidCharts can distinguish itself from similar applications, like Visio and Omnigraffle.  That being said, compatibility is key, and as the LucidChart team is aware of Visio’s popularity, the application allows users to import their existing Visio documents without losing their place — and continue to update and edit in LucidChart. The team is also in the process of adding compatibility with other applications, including Omnigraffle. From mind maps and organizational charts to website wireframes and UML diagrams, LucidChart has been designed as an application to be used anywhere, any device, and, for users just starting, the application is free. The free version allows two collaborators, 25MB of storage, and 60 objects per document. There are also personal, professional, and team versions, which scale in price up to $25 a month. You can read more about LucidChart’s pricing here.  LucidChart also comes with a few nifty features that add some enhancements to the typical user experience one finds in graph and diagram creation tools. Check the video out below for an example: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Fab.com, which started out as Fabulis, a social networking site for gay men, has not only recently changed its name but also started from scratch with an entirely new business centered around online flash sales of design items. The startup recently completed a $1 million early-stage round of funding from investor/actor Ashton Kutcher, SV Angel, SoftTech VC and previous backers First Round Capital, Baroda Ventures and The Washington Post. The company has now raised another $8 million in Series A funding, we’ve learned.  Menlo Ventures led the round, and several existing investors participated, including First Round, Baroda Ventures, The Washington Post, Fab.com founder and CEO Jason Goldberg, SoftTech VC, SV Angel, Ashton Kutcher, Guy Oseary and A-Grade Investments, and Zelkova Ventures.  A number of angel investors also took part, including Kevin Rose, Jon Anderson, Don Baer, Josh Kushner, Dave Morgan, Ben Ling, and David Tisch. Quite an impressive list of backers, I daresay. Fab.com features daily design inspirations and flash sales at up to 70% off retail. Fab.com membership is free but numbers are restricted in order to maintain low prices. Since launching on June 9, 2011, Fab.com claims more than 350,000 people have signed up for the service, with members placing more than 1,000 orders per day. Earlier this month, Fab.com CEO Jason Goldberg told me the startup was already profitable on $1.3 million in revenue after only 30 days after its debut, with a workforce of around 45 employees. The company says it will use the proceeds of the fresh round of financing to grow its base of designers, expand sales categories and develop more community features. The round brings its total capital raised to about $11.6 million. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s a simple law of e-commerce: the more consumer reviews there are on a product, the more sales will result.  “As review numbers go up, conversions go up, and SEO traffic goes up,” says  Cathy Halligan, SVP of sales and marketing for PowerReviews (and former CMO of Walmart.com).  PowerReviews powers 23 million reviews across 5,500 sites including Staples.com, Gap.com, ToysRUs.com, and eFaucets, and is adding about 1 million reviews a month.  But all of these reviews are siloed on each individual site.  Today, PowerReviews is making it possible for brand sites to syndicate their reviews to e-commerce sites for the same products through a new product called BrandShare. Consumers often go to brand sites to do research and leave reviews there, but most brand sites don’t actually sell their own products.  PowerReviews already has a product catalog across its network of 35 million products.  It will now take any reviews, whether they were written on its software, a competitor’s, or a home-grown review system and allow brands to syndicate them to existing PowerReviews customers. For products that don’t have any reviews on a retailer’s site, this is a way to fill up those pages with reviews.  Halligan says that going from zero reviews to one review with 4.2 stars or better improves conversion rates (sales) by 20 percent.  And while it only takes 7 to 10 reviews to get a stable star rating, keeping reviews fresh helps with search engine optimization.  Getting people directly to a product page through search thanks to an indexed review has an outsized impact on sales conversions as well. Social sharing also helps.  People can share their PowerReviews on Facebook.  And each share is worth $15.72 in incremental sales. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInLearnVest Debuts Its Female-Focused Mint.com To Help Women Manage Their Financial AccountsOn the heels of raising $19 million in new funding, personal finance site for women LearnVest is debuting a more feature-rich platform.  LearnVest, which launched at TechCrunch50 in 2009, has a simple goal: to help women organize their finances and learn how to become financially savvy. It’s kind of like an online version of financial planner Suze Orman blended with personal finance site Mint.com. Founded by entrepreneur Alexa Von Tobel, the startup aims to fill a big hole in terms of providing an online destination that is catered towards educating women about finance. The company, which has one million users, is launching My Money Center, which like Mint.com, allows women to aggregate all of their financial accounts, such as bills, credit cards, checking accounts, savings, 401K and more, to give users a comprehensive view into the health of their finances. Members can link all of their accounts into a Financial Inbox, which allows them to track their spending.  The platform aims to replicate the old-school style of organizing your bills into file folders and mimics a foldering system. The platform looks like an email inbox and allow members to personalize their budget items and track monthly spending goals. For example, when a charge is made to a member’s credit card, it will register in the LearnVest My Money Center and will be automatically filed into the appropriate budget folder.  The startup is also offering personalized financial advice via the LearnVest Advice Center, in which members can submit questions focused on their own financial situations and will receive a tailored response within a matter of hours. This is included in LearnVest’s premium membership, which costs $4.99 per day, $39.99 for three months and $129.99 for a year.  The Advice Center also offers access to LearnVest Courses, which help women create a financial plan. Of course, LearnVest will continue to offer its free bootcamps, which educate women on various financial subjects, including a Financial Basics Bootcamp, Cut Your Costs Bootcamp, and Investing Bootcamp.  As Von Tobel explains to be in the TechCrunch TV interview embedded in the post, women need more tailored financial products in the same way that women join female-focused gyms. It’s about building sound financial habits, she explains, and a more personalized, tailored approach helps this.  You can check out a demo of the new features below. We also have a promo code for readers who want a free day pass for LearnVest’s premium service. Just enter the code ‘tc2011’ in the next week when signing up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last April, one of the strongest startups from TechStars’s Demo Day in New York City was ThinkNear, which turns mobile ads into hyper-targeted daily deal offers for local merchants.  The startup is officially launching later today to restaurants, spas, and hair salons in New York City.   It also raised $1.63 million in a series A, which was previously reported by Ben Popper at Betabeat.  The round was led by Roger Ehrenberg’s IA Ventures, but also includes many previously undisclosed investors such as Google Ventures (now I know why Rich Miner was lurking in the TechStars NY offices), Qualcomm Ventures, Metamorphic Ventures, and ff Venture Capital.  David Tisch and David Cohen from TechStars invested personally, as did Matt Turck from Bloomberg Ventures. ThinkNear tries to solve the all-or-nothing problem that most daily deals present to local merchants.  They produce a stampede of foot traffic, but not necessarily when the merchants need it. Instead, ThinkNear lets merchants tell the system when they normally experience slow times (and it also looks at other data like weather) to spit out offers to people nearby.  Consumers don’t have to sign up for anything either, they just see the offers as normal mobile banner ads on their phones. It also tries to do everything automatically for local business owners, most of whom don’t have time to constantly monitor mobile ad campaigns.  “We algorithmically determine how busy or slow merchants are based on self reported data and macro data like weather,” says CEO Eli Portnoy.  “And we use that to answer three questions for merchants automatically: When they should discount, how much they should discount, and where they should place that discount.” ThinkNear’s targeting gets smarter over time as it tracks which discounts get clicked on and which ones actually get claimed.  ThinkNear tackles the redemption loop challenge with specific voucher codes that consumers show store employees (which is more clunky than integrating directly into the payment system, but should work well enough with minimal training).   Ultimately, local business owners already have enough on their plate running their business and do not want to offer discounts during times when they are already busy. ThinkNear takes over the pain of managing mobile marketing and discount campaigns by handling the entire process and creating the right discounts based on the real-time capacity of businesses at any given time during the day.   As I wrote in my original post: The company was founded by two ex-Amazon employees with some serious technical chops. They are building a fairly straightforward way for local merchants to deliver mobile ads to consumers based on their proximity to their stores. Using existing ad networks and the ability to geo-target the ads, ThinkNear will give local merchants a dashboard that lets them set up offers based on when they need the most foot traffic. “We start by capturing busy and slow times for merchants,” says CEO and founder Eli Portnoy, “and also track redemption data to see what discounts work.” ThinkNear uses all of that data “to figure out what discounts to put in front of consumers.” And does not require the local merchants to continuously monitor the campaign after it is set up. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Assistly, a cloud-based customer support platform, raised $3 million in funding in January of this year from Bullpen Capital, Index Ventures, Salesforce, as well as several other angels and VCs.  Since launching in September of last year and taking on new capital, Assistly has brought on companies like Yelp, Etsy, 37signals, Pandora, Vimeo, and Spotify as paying customers, attracting them with a customer support platform that allows businesses to respond to its customers beyond traditional customer service paths like email and phone calls by tapping into social media conversations on Facebook, Twitter, and other social networking sites. It also helps that the startup counts Mark Cuban and David Liu as advisors. But beyond the ability to monitor customer chatter on a number of different channels, Assistly enables businesses to filter those conversations, organize them in prioritized, actionable lists, as well as achieve access to customer histories, automate all of these support processes, and view metrics and analysis. Another big selling point for Assistly was its pricing model, which included a “Flex” pricing model, which allowed users to buy usage time for users who are not full-time agents (like execs, developers, marketing, etc.), with the ability to create additional Flex seats at no charge per seat.  However, since launch, like a good customer support startup, Assistly has been listening to its own customer feedback, and it thinks that it’s found an even more appealing pricing structure. After all, there’s no more appealing word than “free”. Today, Assistly is rolling out a new pricing model that includes a full-featured version of its service for free — along with version 2.0 of its SaaS software. Assistly Co-founder and CEO Alex Bard told us that the original pricing model was “the familiar SaaS model you’ve seen hundreds of times”, it was three-tiered (standard, professional, and enterprise), with each tear adding more features, yet simultaneously getting more expensive on a per-seat basis. The idea behind the updates is to get away from offering “a hobbled freemium model”. Customers told the startup that they wanted to start off with the service for free, and then grow inexpensively as they themselves grew. What’s more, customers don’t like tiered pricing structures; they want to buy what they need when they need it, not to be forced into an upgrade later. Simply put, they want a price system that’s simple, understandable, and transparent, and they want to be able to change their mind. While it may sound like a lot to ask for, Assistly thinks that it’s come up with a good solution. The first full-time agent is free for every Assistly customer, and businesses can add as many “Flex Agents” as they want for free, paying only $1 an hour for actual usage, and it did away with tiered pricing altogether. Assistly added inexpensive “a la carte” upgrades that users can add or remove whenever they are so inspired. The team also grandfathered in all of its existing customers, tweaking it in such a way as to give them the best mix of the old and the new. According to Bard, not a single customer’s price went up. It sounds like Netflix could take a page out of Assistly’s book.  In another unique twist, the startup has given its customers the ability to earn bonus flex hours as rewards (what it’s calling Assistly Wow Rewards), which they earn just by using the service. So, this means that actions a business might normally take earns them points and lowers the overall cost of running the service. For example, if a business connects its Twitter account with Assistly, it might receive 3 free hours of free support.  Beyond a new pricing setup and rewards, Assistly v2.0 offers a redesign of its on-boarding, admin, and reporting interfaces, which have gotten a more intuitive look and feel, as well as the additional support of workflows.  These are all great additions for a SaaS CRM platform, and have made Assistly one of the more easy-to-use and afford platforms out there. It’ll be interesting to see if customers react in kind. For more on the new pricing structure, click here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’re anything like me, this scenario may be somewhat familiar: You’re standing in the aisle of your local supermarket, or Walgreens, and you’re looking to buy a particular type of product, be it peanut butter or shaving cream or shampoo, yet you don’t have any particular allegiance to one brand over another.  Confronted with the often overwhelming abundance of choice, you may hold the product up to the light or quickly read the back label, hoping some divine intervention will guide you to the right choice. In the end, you probably make a choice based on appearance, brand familiarity, or something you read somewhere once. (When, really, you have no idea what the difference is between Scope and Listerine, other than minty-ness.)   Now, in spite of feeling fortunate to have surfeit options baked into my shopping experience, I often find myself asking, “do we really need 40 different brands of deodorant to choose from?” The market might respond by saying something annoying like, “competition is good, bro”, but I ask, if we’re going to have this level of choice, is there a better way to be making product decisions other than by oft-times arbitrary selection criteria? A young New York City-based startup is trying to answer that question in the affirmative. Consmr, besides not liking all of its vowels, is attempting to build the Yelp, or Rotten Tomatoes, of consumer packaged goods (CPGs). While at this point Consmr may not be able to offer you a thoroughly detailed treatise on the value of Scope over Listerine, that’s the bent of its long-term goal.  Consmr Founder and CEO Ryan Charles left his full-time job at Zagat (where he was the head of mobile and was responsible for its partnerships with Foodspotting and Foursquare) at the end of March to pursue his new startup. Why? The genesis dates back to the height of the recession, he says, when a lot of we consumers became more discerning (and price conscious) in regard to their daily product decisions. While there’s been tremendous growth in web research on CPGs, the sources for this information are fragmented. There’s no Yelp or LibraryThing, or sites taking advantage of crowdsourced data or social integration to help you choose which product is right for you. And he has a good point; all-in-one sources for movie, TV, book, and restaurant recommendations (to name a few) are alive and well, so why not for CPGs?  While the idea is an appealing one, the question is, of course, why one should spend time writing reviews of toothpaste? What incentive is there? Consmr isn’t going to bribe you to write reviews, but it will give you badges. Whether an average day-to-day user is browsing for the answer to a question like “what’s the best green-friendly laundry detergent?” or a micro-expert (like an ice cream blogger) wants to share their particular experience, the initial incentive is a game-ified user experience: Anyone can compete to earn badges that Consmr calls “flair” (a la Office Space), or “level-up” in reputation, or become a category expert.  The appeal of being a category expert, Charles says, is that category experts are featured prominently on the site, including being recommended as someone to “follow”. Thus, users are incentivized to write longer reviews, to take time with their descriptions, in the effort to become a product expert — a veritable lord or lady of the detergents. Consmr has been in the process, like every other data-based recommendation engine before it, of gathering user reviews and building a sizable dataset. In the next few weeks, it plans to add recommendations based on products a user has rated highly and trends it picks up in your Consmr activity. (Similar in conceit to Netflix’s recommendation engine.) Consmr is also hard at work on its mobile apps — an equally important piece of the in-store recommendations puzzle. And, today, the startup added to its feature set by forging a partnership with Gary Vaynerchuk, the popular author, business guru, and “sommelier of social media”. Beginning today, all of Vaynerchuk’s Daily Grape and Wine Library TV reviews will be added to the site, which those who follow the wine guy will be able to see daily in their personal feed.  “I get thrown a lot of stuff on a daily basis and sometimes my intuition just tells me a platform is worth trying out”, Vaynerchuk told TechCrunch. “I’m thrilled to speculate at times with new platforms and Consmr hit my radar as something that was worth trying”. Consmr launched officially to the world back in June and is in the process of raising funding. The site still has some work to do on bits and pieces of its design and will require some serious adoption before product recommendations become flawless, but the idea could have legs. Rating different types of peanut butter is surprisingly addicting. Let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s testament to the enthusiasm of the Uber fan base that we’ve gotten multiple tips this afternoon about the service being live in Seattle. Via a quick phone call with Uber CEO Travis Kalanick, I’ve confirmed that Uber has indeed soft-launched in the Pacific Northwest’s largest city, with an initial three black cars in its test fleet. Perhaps because of general cost of living is lower, Seattle Uber pricing is less than its counterpart in New York or San Francisco — At a $7.00 base fare with a $12 minimum versus a $8.00 base fare and a $15 minimum. Uber costs more than a cab obviously (the company is currently experimenting with pricing) but totally worth it if you need to get somewhere fast, safely or just want to impress someone with your uncanny ability to summon a black car at will. As having enough drivers to quell car requests is a key issue with Uber, Kalanick tells me that they’re positioning the initial Seattle Ubers as for “adventurous users only” even though the app is live and ostensibly anyone can use it. Kalanick hopes to have dozens of cars available upon full launch, which he jokingly says we should expect at some point in the next two weeks to three months. While Kalanick couldn’t give out any information about how successful the Uber launches were in San Francisco or New York, or which cities will come after Seattle, he did give me this one stat, “The best metric I can give you is that Uber is killing it in San Francisco and we’re crushing it in New York.” Sure enough, five minutes after stealth launch, photographer Chase Jarvis — the Seattle equivalent of our own Erick Schonfeld — scooped one up (image below).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Los Angeles-based deals site Bevvy launches its permanent deals reservation system today, providing discounts for hardcore club types and casual happy hour attendees alike. With the new system Bevvy basically gives users 50% off their tabs at selected bars and clubs, taking a $10 reservation fee for a $100 tab and a $50 reservation fee for a $500 bottle service. Bevvy eliminates the coupons associated with other deals sites by giving users a unique “speakeasy”-type password with which to inform servers of their participation (staff gets an updated password list via email daily). Related: I really like the idea of going up to a server and whispering something like “Rumpelstiltskin” to get a discount on booze. Bevvy deals aren’t “daily,” and can be used year round in order to maximize yield management and spread out business for club owners. The deals for nightlife space is heating up, as competitor Poggld (a “Groupon for nightlife”) just expanded to New York and LA. Bevvy’s site has Twitter and Facebook integration so users can give their friends a heads up about where the discounted party will be at. Users are also encouraged to invite friends via social media for a $10 credit toward more Bevvys. With Bevvy, co-founder Niall Donnelly draws upon his experience as an owner of various nightclubs and bars including Anam Cocktail Lounge and Rolling Stone LA. You can tell: Bevvy monetizes through reservation fees, so businesses get 100% of the customers’ spend. Customers are also encouraged to tip bar staff on the full amount of the bill for obvious good karma reasons. With 100k in seed funding, the company plans on expanding to other cities in the next few months and has a mobile app in the works. Dubbed “the Gilt for nightlife,” it’s no surprise that Bevvy has also partnered up with Gilt City to offer deals via its website shortly. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Motif Investing, a new vehicle that allows you to invest in ideas, has raised $20 million in Series B financing led by Ignition Partners with participation from Norwest Venture Partners and Foundation Capital. This brings the company’s total funding to $26 million. Motif, which is in private beta, was founded by former Microsoft executive Hardeep Walia and hedge fund analyst Tariq Hilaly to give individuals a new way to invest based on themes. Instead of choosing to buy stock in specific companies, Motif allows investors to invest in different portfolios of stocks, each called a “motif,” that are centered around everyday ideas. For example, motifs can be built around themes and ideas ranging from cloud computing to democracy in the Middle East. In addition, each motif can be customized to meet an individual’s ideas or needs. Walia gives the example of “cloud computing” or “mobile internet” as growth areas that have seen significant gains over the past few years but he says most people don’t know how to map these ideas into an actual investment.  For example, there’s a lot of current buzz around the impact the debt ceiling negotiations is going to have on interest rates in the US. Suppose you were reading a news story about how interest rates are likely to rise and decided that you would like to invest in rising interest rates. How would you do this? If you have a money manager, you could call him or her, but it’s not an easy task.  Motif says that the challenge to investing in rising interest rates is that these rates have a negative impact on corporate earnings because they result in increased short-term borrowing costs. So rising interest rates can typically hurt stocks.  But the startup’s Rising Interest Rate Motif would include the small number of companies that hold very large sums of customer cash, and where interest rates rise they can actually increase their earnings. Specific examples of companies that hold large sums of customer cash include online brokerages such as Charles Schwab or E*TRADE, payment solutions companies such as Western Union or Heartland Payment Systems, payroll processors such as Paychex, prepaid cards such as Green Dot, and custodian banks such as Northern Trust. Ignition’s John Connors, who was formerly Microsoft’s CFO and is a board member at Motif, said of the investment startup, “when introduced to Motif Investing, I recognized its potential to have a major impact on how people invest…I am excited about the experienced team assembled and their approach to disrupting the financial services marketplace.” Walia says that the investment vehicle will focus on a variety of “ideas,” beyond just technology, and is still tweaking its pricing model and minimum investment amount. The company will be launching publicly in the Fall. Motif will use the new funding for product development and hiring.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily CloudBees, a company that helps companies manage the lifecycle of Java application development and deployment in the cloud, has raised $10.5 million in Series B funding. The round was led by Lightspeed Venture Partners and joined by Matrix Partners, following up the latter’s initial lead investment in the company’s $4 million Series A, which also included JBoss alums Robert Bickel and Marc Fleury. CloudBees, which launched in November 2010, offers a platform for companies to develop, run and manage enterprise Java applications in the cloud – a Java platform-as-a-service solution if you will. At present, the CloudBees platform includes DEV@cloud, a service that lets developers take their build and test environments to the cloud, and RUN@cloud, which lets teams deploy these apps to production on the cloud. Last year, the company acquired InfraDNA (and its founder Kohsuke Kawaguchi, creator of the Hudson continuous integration server). And right after it raised its Series A round, CloudBees acquired Stax Networks, a rival Java PaaS solutions provider. The proceeds of this round will be used to roll out additional product capabilities and boost marketing and sales efforts for the CloudBees platform. John Vrionis, managing director at Lightspeed Venture Partners, will join the company’s board of directors, which also includes David Skok from Matrix Partners, Robert Bickel and CloudBees CEO (and former JBoss CTO) Sacha Labourey. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Just like it told us it would back in February, Facebook has started to move its first group of employees into Building 10 of its new Menlo Park campus in the old Sun Building on the Bayfront Expressway. How do we know this? Well Facebook Product Architect Aaron Sittig has documented the move and the elaborate decorative elements involved in a Facebook album called “Building 10 at Night,” which we’ve included above.  Highlights: A phone booth (!), purple glazed windows, chalkboard paint, a tons of Unistrut benches and the re-incorporation of the Sun’s logo-etched glass doors for its conference rooms. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Part of Google’s new social platform Google+ includes a group video chat feature called Google Hangouts, which is great for group video chat and sharing. As my colleague MG Siegler wrote in his initial review of Google+, Google Hangouts attempts to solve the social problem of video chat by making it easy for you to let others know that you’re interested in chatting. You can share a piece of content, like a YouTube clip, and everyone in the Hangout can watch it together while talking about it.  The feature is designed to create group chats (of up to ten people) within Circles on Google+. Of course it was only a matter of time before someone tried to add a Chatroulette-type of random functionality to the video chat service. PlusRoulette has launched as a way to create a public Google+ hangout that anyone can join. You simply create a hangout, and list the URL on PlusRoulette. If you are looking for an already public hangout, PlusRoulette will list available hangouts.  GPHangouts also provides a similar function by listing all the public Google+ Hangouts, but you have create hangout on Google+ separately, then add the URL of the hangout to GPHangouts. With PlusRoulette, you can actually create a Google+ hangout through the site’s interface.  Because your name is attached to your Google+ account, the smutty Chatroulette problem is hopefully avoided.  Let the random video chats on Hangouts begin! Latest headlines delivered to you daily I’ve been meaning to address this Lytro thing since it hit a few weeks ago. I wrote about omnifocus cameras as far back as 2008, and more recently in 2010, and while at the time I was more interested in the science behind the systems, though it appears that Lytro uses a different method than either of those. Lytro has been slightly close-lipped about their camera, to say the least, though that’s understandable when your entire business revolves around proprietary hardware and processes. Some of it can be derived from Lytro founder Ren Ng’s dissertation (which is both interesting and readable), but in the meantime it remains to be shown whether these “living pictures” are truly compelling or something which will be forgotten instantly by consumers. A recent fashion shoot with model Coco Rocha, the first in-vivo demonstration of the device, is dubious evidence at best.  A prototype camera was loaned out for an afternoon with Lytro’s photographer Eric Cheng, and while the hardware itself has been carefully edited or blurred out of the making-of video, it’s clear that the device is no larger than a regular point-and-shoot, and it seems to function more or less normally, with an LCD of some sort on the back, and the usual framing techniques. No tripod required, etc. It’s worth noting that they did this in broad daylight with a gold reflector for lighting, so low light capability isn’t really addressed — but I’m getting ahead of myself.  Speaking from the perspective of a tech writer and someone interested in cameras, optics, and this sort of thing in general, I have to say the technology is absolutely amazing. But from the perspective of a photographer, I’m troubled. To start with, a large portion of the photography process has been removed — and not simply a technical part, but a creative part. There’s a reason focus is called focus and not something like “optical optimum” or “sharpness.” Focus is about making a decision as a photographer about what you’re taking a picture of. It’s clear that Ng is not of the same opinion: he describes focusing as “a chore,” and believes removing it simplifies the process. In a way, it does — the way hot dogs simplify meat. Without focus, it’s just the record of a bunch of photons. And saying it’s a revolution in photography is like saying dioramas are a revolution in sculpture. I’m also concerned about image quality. The camera seems to be fundamentally limited to a low resolution — and by resolution I mean true definition, not just pixel count. I say fundamentally because of the way the device works. Let me get technical here for a second, though there’s a good chance I’m wrong in the particulars.  The way the device works is more or less the way I imagined it did before I read Ng’s dissertation. To be brief, the image from the main lens is broken up by a microlens array over the image sensor, and by analyzing (a complex and elegant process) how the light enters various pixel wells underneath the many microlenses (which each see a slightly different picture due to their different placements), a depth map is created along with the color and luminance maps that make up traditional digital images. Afterwards, an image can be rendered with only the objects at a selected depth level rendered in maximum clarity. The rest is shown with increasing blur, probably according to some standard curve governing depth of field falloff. Immediately it must be perceived that an enormous amount of detail is lost, not just because you are interposing an extra optical element between the light and the sensor (and one which simultaneously must be extremely low in faults and yet is very difficult to make so), but also because the system fundamentally relies on creating semi-redundant data to compare with one another, meaning pixels are yielding less data for a final image than they would be in a traditional system. They are of course providing information of a different kind, but as far as producing a sharp, accurate image, they are doing less. Ng acknowledges this in his paper, and the reduction of a 16-megapixel sensor to a 296×296 image (a reduction of some 95.5% of the pixel count) in the prototype is testament to this reducing factor.  The process has no doubt been improved along the lines he suggests are possible: square pixels have likely been replaced with hexagonal, the lenses and pixel widths made complementary, and so on. But the limitation still means trouble, especially on the microscopic sensors being deployed to camera phones and compact point and shoots. I’ve complained before that these micro-cameras already have terrible image quality, smearing, noise, limited exposure options, and so on. The Lytro approach solves some of these problems and exacerbates others. On the whole downsampling might be an improvement, now that I think of it (the resolutions of cheap cameras exceed their resolving power immensely), but I’m worried that the cheap lenses and small size will limit Lytro’s ability to make that image as versatile as their samples — at least, for a decent price. There’s a whole chapter in Ng’s paper about correcting for micro-optical aberrations, though, so it’s not like they’re unaware of this issue. I’m also worried about the quality of the blur or bokeh, but that’s an artistic scruple unlikely to be shared by casual shooters. The limitation of the aperture to a single opening simplifies the mechanics but also leaves control of the image to ISO and exposure length. These are both especially limited in smaller sensors, since the tiny, densely-packed photosensors can’t be relied on for high ISOs, and consequently the exposure times tend to be longer than is practical for handheld shots. Can the Lytro camera possibly gain back in post-processing what it loses in initial definition? Lastly, and this is more of a question, I’m wondering whether these images can be made to be all the way in focus, the way a narrow aperture would show it. My guess is no; there’s a section in the paper on extending the depth of field, but I’m not sure the effect will stand scrutiny in normal-sized images. It seems to me (though I may be mistaken) that the optical inconsistencies (which, to be fair, generate parallax data and enable the 3D effect) between the different “exposures” mean that only slices can be shown at a time, or at the very least there are limitations to which slices can be selected. The fixed aperture may also put a floor on how narrow your depth of field can be. Could the effect achieved in this picture be replicated, for instance? Or would I have been unable to isolate just that quarter-inch slice of the world? All right, I’m done being technical. My simplified objections are two in numer: first, is it really possible to reliably make decent photos with this kind of camera, as it’s intended to be implemented (i.e. as an affordable compact camera)? And second, is it really adding something that people will find worthwhile?  As to the first: designing and launching a device is no joke, and I wonder whether Ng, coming from an academic background, is prepared for the harsh realities of product. Will the team be able to make the compromises necessary to bring it to shelves, and will those compromises harm the device? They’re a smart, driven group so I don’t want to underestimate them, but what they’re attempting really is a technical feat. Distribution and presentation of these photos will have to be streamlined as well. When you think about it, a ton of the “living photo” is junk data, with the “wrong” focus or none at all. Storage space isn’t so much a problem these days, but it’s still something that needs to be looked at. The second gives me more pause. As a photographer I’m strangely unexcited by the ostensibly revolutionary ability to change the focus. The fashion shoot, a professional production, leaves me cold. The “living photos” seem lifeless to me because they lack artistic direction. I’m afraid that people will find that most photos they want to take are in fact of the traditional type, because the opportunities presented by multiple focus points are simply few and far between. Ng thinks it simplifies the picture-taking process, but it really doesn’t. It removes the need to focus, but the problem is that we, as human beings, focus. Usually on either one thing or the whole scene. Lytro photos don’t seem to capture either of those things. They present the information from a visual experience in a way that is unfamiliar and unnatural except in very specific circumstances. A “focused” Lytro photo will never be as good as its equivalent from a traditional camera, and a “whole scene” view presents no more than you would see if the camera was stopped down. Like the compound insect eye it partially mimics, it’s amazing that it works in the first place, and its foreignness by its nature makes it intriguing, but I wouldn’t call it a step up. “Gimmick” is far too harsh a word to use on a truly innovative and exciting technology such as Lytro’s. But I fear that will be the perception when the tools they’ve created are finally put to use. It’s new, and it’s powerful, yes, but is it something people will actually want to use? I think that, like so many high-tech toys these days, it’s more fun in theory than it is in practice. That’s just my opinion, though. Whether I’m right or wrong will of course be determined later this year, when Lytro’s device is actually delivered, assuming they ship on time. We’ll be sure to update then (if not before; I have a feeling Ng may want to respond to this article) and get our own hands-on impressions of this interesting device. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google has just acquired facial recognition software company PittPatt (Pittsburgh Pattern Recognition), according to an announcement on the startup’s site.  PittPatt, a project spawned from Carnegie Mellon University, develops a facial recognition technology that can match people across photos, videos, and more. The company has created a number of algorithms in face detection, face tracking and face recognition. PittPatt’s face detection and tracking SDK locates human faces in photographs and tracks the motion of human faces in video.  Here’s the notice PittPatt has up on its site: Joining Google is the next thrilling step in a journey that began with research at Carnegie Mellon University’s Robotics Institute in the 1990s and continued with the launching of Pittsburgh Pattern Recognition (PittPatt) in 2004. We’ve worked hard to advance the research and technology in many important ways and have seen our technology come to life in some very interesting products. At Google, computer vision technology is already at the core of many existing products (such as Image Search, YouTube, Picasa, and Goggles), so it’s a natural fit to join Google and bring the benefits of our research and technology to a wider audience. We will continue to tap the potential of computer vision in applications that range from simple photo organization to complex video and mobile applications. Google has reportedly been exploring adding facial recognition to its products (i.e. Google Goggles) more seriously but has held back because of privacy concerns. As the company told Search Engine Land in March, Google wouldn’t put out facial recognition in a mobile app unless there were very strict privacy controls in place.  But in May, Google Chairman Eric Schmidt said the company is “unlikely to employ facial recognition programs.” Google issued this statement confirming the acquisition:  “The Pittsburgh Pattern Recognition team has developed innovative technology in the area of pattern recognition and computer vision. We think their research and technology can benefit our users in many ways, and we look forward to working with them.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFounder Advice on Freemium and White-LabelingToday, we are trying a special edition of Founder Stories; that we are calling Founder Office Hours.  Inspired by Paul Graham’s Office Hours onstage at our last Techcrunch Disrupt, we brought together a group of startup founders in our NYC studio to get feedback and advice.  Joining regular host Chris Dixon is Josh Kopelman, managing partner of First Round Capital.   In this first video above, Adam Neary, founder of Profitably, asks whether he should charge for a new product or go freemium.  Profitably is a business dashboard for small businesses that pulls accounting data from QuickBooks and helps visualize it.  The company is developing a new product around business planning and modeling that traditionally is only available to larger corporations.  Should he charge a monthly fee for the new product, or go freemium—give it away for free and upsell to premium features? It depends on what his immediate goals are: getting big or getting profitable.  “Customer acquisition for small- to mid-sized businesses is the hardest thing,” notes Kopelman. “You have to market to them as consumers.” If the product has broad appeal, you can consider giving it away for free as a way to subsidize the cost of acquiring new customers.  But you need to have something to upsell.  “You don’t want to have too much free and not enough -emium,” he says. What about building a white-label version for a large customers as a way to hit quarterly targets?  Both Dixon and Kopelman agree that if Neary wants to raise more money down the line, investors are more likely to put a higher value the business if it has a direct relationship with the end customer. Watch previous Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social networks for cancer patients and survivors are not new.  There’s the KnowCancer Community and Planet Cancer for younger survivors, for instance.  Now there is I Had Cancer, a new resource for cancer patients, survivors, and friends and family who are supporters.  The site just launched in private beta.  If you have cancer or know somebody who does, we have 250 invites that you can sign up for on the beta site using the code: C55484.  (People can also sign up for the beta on the regular site and will be notified when that launches).   I Had Cancer was founded by a team out of Squeaky Wheel Media in New York City: Mailet Lopez, Robert Boyle (who also created local Q&A app Crowdbeacon), and Anthony Del Monte (president and founder of Sqweaky Wheel).  Lopez is a survivor of breast cancer, and she started out wanting to create a blog for other cancer survivors called I Had Cancer.  But that evolved into a full-fledged community support site where survivors and family members can share their cancer stories and help others who are going through the same experience. The site allows members to create profiles, tell their stories, and identify what type of cancer they battled against.  You can find other members by location, cancer type, year diagnosed, age, or gender. The site also features discussion boards with questions and answers.  Those are the public-facing parts of the site.  Once you find someone with a similar experience or type of cancer, you can connect invite them to your Circle, and if they agree, you both can share more private news and messages. It is a mutual follow like Facebook, not a one-way follow like Google+ (Although it otherwise shares a similar Circles concept).  The startup has raised $750,000 in an angel round.  You can learn more by watching these videos here and here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Diversion, a Los Angeles-based social gaming studio backed by Shawn Fanning and Michael Eisner – who are billed as ‘founding advisors’ – has raised an undisclosed amount of seed funding from Google chairman Eric Schmidt’s TomorrowVentures, Hearst Corporation and Eisner’s The Tornante Company.  Marcy Carsey (producer of sitcoms like The Cosby Show,  Roseanne, 3rd Rock from the Sun and That 70’s Show) and angel investor Art Bilger also joined the round. In addition, the fledgling company announced that it has landed a $1 million advertising deal with Sony Pictures, and that it has launched a new social game dubbed The A-List on Facebook. Earlier this year, we reported that Diversion had raised $300,000 in seed funding from The Tornante Company, and that it had launched its first game FameTown. According to AppData, the game is currently averaging about 480,000 monthly active users, which gives it a rank of 480 on the Leaderboard (a far cry from #1, Zynga’s CityVille, which boasts more than 80 million monthly users). The A-List, which launched on Facebook earlier this month, is a game where users star in virtual movies to gain fame, fortune, and notoriety among other industry professionals. Diversion was founded in 2010 by Dayvid Iannaci (CEO), Amir Haleem (CTO), Chris Bruce (Lead Developer) and Jason Carlton (VP of Content). Latest headlines delivered to you daily If there’s one thing I keep hearing over and over when it comes to the European startup scene, it’s that investors who are not seriously looking at the Turkish market may be missing out on some of the continent’s biggest digital companies in the next 10 years.  My plan is to go to Turkey some day and investigate this burgeoning startup ecosystem up close, and I hope that trip will take me to some of its marvelous cities and beautiful beaches. I digress, I digress.  Our sources in Turkey (local tech blog Webrazzi) tell us Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers and Tiger Global have invested between $25 million and $30 million in private shopping site Trendyol.  The Kleiner Perkins investment reportedly values the Istanbul startup at roughly $150 million. My Turkish is a little rusty, but looking at the site I’m going to assume it is the local version of the likes of Vente-privée, Gilt, Beyond The Rack and HauteLook. There’s also Google’s Boutiques.com, eBay’s fashion store and Amazon’s MyHabit, of course. According to Webrazzi, Trendyol earlier raised a $2 million and a $10 million round, and that some of the shareholders cashed out as a result of this third round of financing. This is reportedly the first investment Kleiner Perkins has made in Turkey. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Nearbuy Systems, the maker of indoor positioning solutions, announced today that it has raised $1 million in seed funding. The seed round was led by Motorola Solutions Venture Capital, Innovation Endeavors, and Metamorphic Ventures. The funding will be used to bring Nearbuy’s technology to retail stores across the U.S. Just as startups like ZuluTime and Shopkick are finding different ways to innovate in the in-store loyalty and advertising space, Nearbuy, too is going after the “holy grail” of in-store marketing: In-store consumer location. Because GPS tends not to be able to locate you indoors — and the indoor systems that do exist tend not to be precise — Nearbuy has developed a refined WiFi technology that can locate a customer in the store within 3 feet. With advanced positioning, retailers can offer consumers discounts, coupons, and deals in realtime as they wander through the aisles, making those tricky purchasing decisions. If a consumer is standing in the sporting goods section, the business can use Nearbuy’s technological conduit to serve them with a discount on kayaks, and so on. But, beyond targeted marketing, solutions like Nearbuy’s can offer consumers in-store navigation (which will be great for places like Ikea and Home Depot), a concierge “Help” button, etc. all through a simple opt-in WiFi setup.  And, for businesses, Nearbuy’s LocalEyes solution can integrate with existing infrastructures already in place, create enhanced mobile commerce apps, and using its micro-location data, can glean valuable shopping trends and behavior, and optimize time-consuming stuff like warehouse management and store set-ups.  While it may be slightly off-putting, the fact is that humans spend 87 percent of their time indoors, and, as mobile technology evolves, the devices in our pockets (along with complementary solutions) are becoming more and more adept at tracking our movements. It makes the security and privacy-conscious a little nervous, which is why it’s great to hear that these technologies are opt-in and come with advanced security mechanisms. That being said, these precise positioning systems have the potential to be a goldmine for retailers and advertisers, and can offer some nifty enhancements to the consumer’s shopping experience. “We just want to make the shopping experience better for everyone”, says Nearbuy Founder and CEO Bryan Wargo. As long as they don’t sell my location data to the highest bidder, I’m buying. For more on Nearbuy Systems, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Today marked a bit of leadership shuffling at Etsy, the online marketplace to buy your local hipster a handmade good, as CTO Chad Dickerson takes over the reins as CEO from Rob Kalin. Etsy is Kalin’s brainchild, and the founder has been acting as CEO since 2009.  Dickerson explained the change today on Etsy’s blog, saying that his focus as the new CEO will be to impel Etsy to move faster “and more purposefully”, and re-prioritize risk-taking and “learning by doing” and “iterating”. Etsy has been growing fairly steadily over the last few years, and a report by GreenCrest Capital, a private equity firm, estimated that the startup’s revenue will grow from $72 million to $201 million by 2016.  However, while growth potential is high, the firm said that “storefront concerns were reaching a crescendo”, with customers expressing concern over the amount of effort it takes to maintain an active Etsy storefront.  In Green Capital’s survey of “over two dozen prolific Etsy sellers”, more than 80 percent of sellers “had concerns about their Etsy experience”. These concerns also included financial considerations, competition, privacy concerns, and “Etsy’s lack of technological capabilities”. Well, maybe the CTO being made the new top dog will help to allay some of the latter concern. Another obstacle for Etsy, according to the report, is that the handicraft market “represents less than 1 percent” of retail sales in the U.S. and is “highly fragmented, comprised primarily of thousands of small, independent retailers”.  That being said, the firm predicts that the online craft sales will grow at 9.5 percent per year over the next five years, which would mean that there is market growth potential ahead. However, that number is “well ahead of offline sales”, but short of their expectations of “aggregate U.S. ecommerce market growth at 12 percent”.  comScore also had Etsy hovering at around 7.4 million monthly unique visitors worldwide in May, a number that has remained largely flat going back to December 2010. Based on Green Capital’s report and comScore’s statistics, it would seem that Etsy’s leadership shakeup comes at just the right time. Union Square Ventures Partner Fred Wilson weighed in on the leadership change on his blog, saying: Transitions are never easy on the people involved and the company that goes through them. But they are inevitable in any company’s evolution. Some of them work out well and others not as much. But the role of the management and Board is to constantly try to have the right people in the right roles at the right time. And I think we’ve got that at Etsy now and I’m excited to see Chad step up to the top job and lead the company forward. For more of Dickerson’s post addressed to the Etsy community, check it out here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily PixelFish, the online video advertising solution for small businesses, announced today that it has closed a $4 million series B round of funding. The round was led by early-stage venture firm Bullpen Capital, with contributions from returning investors FLOODGATE and Mack Capital, along with newcomers Tomorrow Ventures, 500 Startups and Western Technology Investment. The latest round of funding adds to the $2.1 million series A round the startup raised back in December of 2010, at which point noted investor and VC Mike Maples joined the startup’s board of directors. The company’s total investment now stands at $7.5 million. PixelFish Founder and CEO John McIntyre said that the infusion of capital will be used to continue to ramp up hiring in its sales and marketing teams. But what is this ‘PixelFish’, you ask? The startup helps small businesses make more out of video advertising, or, in other words, use video as a customer acquisition and conversion tool. McIntyre said that PixelFish’s real value proposition is in the way it customizes video for the viewer. By taking publicly available information from the Web, be it location data or social graph info, and adding a bit of secret sauce, PixelFish wants to start serving you with ads that make sense for you. YouTube’s ads are notoriously questionable, and often seem taken from a cookie-cutter formula, so PixelFish has begun working with the video giant to help make their ads a more targeted experience, which will no doubt be music to the ears of both advertisers and consumers.  Back in April, PixelFish acquired Backyard/Citysquares, the Eric Schmidt and Tomorrow Ventures-backed local deal search company, to help refine the technology that enables PixelFish to serve videos that are not only more targeted based on one’s profession or interests, but also location. Targeted local video advertising has a lot of growth potential, and can be valuable to both advertisers and local businesses. McIntyre said that PixelFish is primarily focused on its partnership with YouTube at the moment, but the startup was successful as one of the early providers of advertising to GoogleTV, and plans to expand its reach in the near future. Latest headlines delivered to you daily CX,  a cloud storage and SaaS data file management system, has raised $5 million in new funding from Eric Schmidt’s Tomorrow Ventures and Hanna Capital. This brings the company’s total funding to $10 million. CX, which has flown under the radar despite the company’s launch earlier this year, is also announcing that it has acquired fellow cloud-based file storage company FileDen. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed we are told the deal was a mixture of stock and cash. CX allows users to backup, synchronize, share, and manage  their data in the cloud, from any device to any device, across multiple platforms, including desktops,  laptops, netbooks, and mobile devices.  CX will sync new, changed, offline, or deleted files to all connected computers and devices and maintains a history as you make changes. Other features include realtime backup, the ability to share a single set of synchronized files with a group of people, and more. CX’s CEO Brad Robertson tells us that platform also sorts through the metadata of files being uploaded, allowing users to view and move through files based on data included. CX has a freemium model and depending on storage needs, users could pay as much as $40 per month for additional storage. CX currently offers customers 10 gigabytes of free storage space. The company acquired FileDen for a number of reasons but mainly, FileDen bring CX’s combined user base to 3.5 million users. FileDen’s storage platform also bring additional functionality to CX, such as an MP3 Convertor for users that want to store their music in the cloud.  It should be interesting to see how CX can compete against some of the more popular cloud storage platforms like Dropbox, Box.net and SugarSync.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily HP TouchPads now have a bit video content thanks to the just-announced Yamgo TV app. Like the other mobile incarnations of this app, the webOS version streams live content from select networks directly to the tablet. For free. The UK-based company already has apps out for nearly every platform including iOS, Android, and Blackberry. The service delivers live sports, news, music videos and entertainment shows directly to these devices. The TouchPad is just the latest device to get in on the fun. “We are very pleased to work with such a significant and recognisable company as HP,” says Ian Mullins, CEO and Founder, Yamgo. “Our users enjoy live TV and video on demand on smartphones and tablets around the world, and now even more people will be able to experience everything our service has to offer – including the best live news, sports, music and entertainment television on the new and impressive platform from HP.”  The interface is a little busy and cluttered, but the service works as advertised. But don’t expect mainstream TV stations. Yamgo’s headliners out of its 41 stations include Fashion TV, Zee Entertainment and Outdoor Sport Channel. Once again, this is a free service to the user. The HP TouchPad needs all the help it can get in the app department. The company needs to do whatever possible to court developers to webOS if the TouchPad is to have any chance in the tablet marketplace. This is just a start. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Breaking news out of Twitter this afternoon, four key product managers have just been let go, we’ve learned. The move was led by Jack Dorsey and will see key product guys Kevin Cheng, Josh Elman, and two others we’ve yet to confirm, leave the company. Twitter refuses to comment on any specific names and would only say that “some people have left the company and we appreciate their contributions”. But we’ve independently confirmed that both Cheng and Elman are two of those no longer with the company. Both of these guys have been vital to the Twitter product over the past couple of years. Cheng, for example, was key on the “New Twitter” project. Elman was previously with Facebook. This move is said to be led by Dorsey as a final measure to remove those still closely affiliated with the old Evan Williams, Biz Stone, and Jason Goldman regime. Those three, of course, all left Twitter in recent months and just re-launched the Obvious startup incubator where Twitter was originally born. Reached, Cheng and Elman both declined to comment. Update: We’ve now confirmed that Anamitra Banerji (@anamitra), who started Twitter’s ad platform, and Jean-Paul Cozzatti (@jeanpaul) will round out the foursome of PMs who are leaving. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In 2008, Daniel R. Odio, Sean Shadmand, and Isaac Mosquera founded a mobile app development startup called PointAbout. The team had their first big success with AppMakr, a service that makes it easy to generate your own custom, native iPhone apps. The company started building custom apps for brands like Disney, The Washington Post, Newsweek, and Politico, bootstrapping until they raised $1 million last year from Mitch Kapor (founder of Lotus), Bill Lee, Rich Chen, Charles River Ventures, and others. In May, Three Pillar Global acquired the professional services — or consulting branch — of PointAbout. Since then, the startup has rebranded as Socialize, grown to a team of sixteen, and has been using the infusion of capital to build a new product to expand the use case and value proposition of AppMakr. Today, the startup is announcing the public launch of a software development kit (SDK) that will allow mobile app developers to add an in-app social networking layer to both new and existing mobile apps. The do-it-yourself SDK is open source and can be implemented in a number of different ways, according to the needs of the developer.  For app users, this means that all Socialize-layered apps will enable social discovery and connection, and all in-app content can be easily shared via Facebook, Twitter, and email — connecting the in-app experience to a user’s social graph. On the flip side, Socialize’s SDK offers developers turnkey mobile social networking features that allow app developers to track a user’s “likes”, shares, and comments and authenticate over Facebook and Twitter. But the real selling point is Socialize’s “activity pane”, which prioritizes user-generated content, listing what other users of the app have shared, liked, and commented on. The SDK also allows users to create profiles, a space intended to let an app’s user share personal information and make them feel more connected with the experience of the app and its other users. Socialize is currently using AppMakr as its sandbox to test the functionality within apps that have already been buit on the platform. So far, 1 million active users are using the 7,811 apps that have been created on iOS, Android, and Windows Phones using AppMakr, 1,461 of which are already running Socialize’s features. And, in case it hasn’t come across yet, while Socialize is offering a lot of low-hanging social features to app developers and users, the real goal here is to tackle the much-talked about “Interest Graph” — on mobile. While the average iPhone user has 40 apps on their phone and the average Android user has 25, the biggest obstacle for app developers today is engagement. An app may see 1,000 downloads in the first day it’s live, but often those downloads only produce a small number of active users. It’s a problem of engagement, so Socialize intends to give developers the tools to bring users back to the app by “unleashing the community of users that have been hiding in the app”, says Socialize Co-founder and CEO Daniel R. Odio. Sure, it’s great to have social functionality, and when you download an app, 90 percent of those who download the app may be on Facebook, but how many of them are your friends? Everyone is connecting via social graph, but the process is still largely anonymous — it’s all about connecting users with shared passions and similar interests. Hence, the appeal of the interest graph. “If a million people download your mobile app, they will never all be friends on Facebook”, Odio said via a recent blog post. “But they all care about your brand, because they downloaded the app. How do they talk to each other today?” The CEO said that, in most cases, they can’t, and this is a huge missed opportunity for brands. That’s why Socialize built a cloud-based API service — to connect users with shared interests. When a user is in a mobile app, they should be able to share their opinions about the content of that app with everyone else who has also downloaded the app. This can happen through comments, sharing and likes, with every other user who has that app getting the ability to read and respond to that comment, “regardless of their Facebook status”, he said. The long term goal? If the startup can get enough users running Socialize-powered apps on their phones, it can form a robust profile of a user’s interests, what co-founder and president Sean Shadmand equates to a person’s “mobile DNA”. Obviously, with this level of personal information at hand, Socialize has to provide a thorough security and opt-in functionality, which the team says that it’s made a top priority. It’s a valuable concept, and it will be interesting to see where Socialize goes from here in terms of in-app engagement — discoverability and recommendations are next up no doubt. To download Socialize SDK for iOS, check ’em out at Github here and for Android click here. And for more on how Socialize works, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Heyzap, the social discovery platform for mobile and online games, has been hard at work adding pieces to its mobile experience. The startup recently brought check-ins to its mobile platform, allowing users to check-in to their favorite games to share scores and achievements on Facebook and Twitter. This also included, a la Foursquare, a badge rewards system, in which gamers can become the “boss” of a game by checking in with gusto.  And, like Foursquare, Heyzap has been collecting data on those check-ins, and is today offering free, personalized game recommendations and locations on game check-ins for Android. (The iOS update will be available at the end of the week.) This update continues to add functionality to Heyzap as a mobile platform: With the ridiculous amount of games out there in the mobile market, game discovery — especially personalized discovery — is essential.  Heyzap Founders Jude Gomila and Immad Akhund think that collaborative filtering and serving users recommendations based on the number of times they’ve checked-in to a certain game is a more effective method than, say, purchase history. Instead, Heyzap’s collaborative filtering algorithm takes a user’s play history account, so if you’ve been checking-in aggressively to Angry Birds, Heyzap will take this info (and how many times you play the game, for example) to recommend games to you based on people with similar gaming preferences. It’s not unlike Netflix’s recommendation system for movies, but in this case, Heyzap is employing your social gaming graph. Another interesting addition to Heyzap’s Android app is location data. If a user is willing to give permission to their friends, they will be able to see not only that their friends are checking into certain games but where. Unless you have friends that will be checking-in from the moon, this may not seem particularly mind-blowing at first, but Heyzap plans on bringing this data to its APIs, which will allow developers to create location-based tournaments and multiplayer sessions.  “Location is an exciting area that hasn’t really been explored in gaming”, says Heyzap CTO James Smith. “Heyzap plans to open up a range of possibilities for users and developers by using location data combined with games’ check-in data. Imagine being able to play a mobile chess game against people on your block”. Pretty cool.  Location is also another important element in the data library Heyzap is building based on user check-in history — the more users check-in, the better its recommendations become — and the more data it collects, the better Heyzap is able to identify trends and “what’s hot” among gamers. Something that benefits everyone.  The Y Combinator alum has raised $3.6 million in capital from Union Square Ventures and other angel investors since its launch in 2008.  A quick note for those interested in taking advantage of Heyzap’s recommendation feature: Users have to download the update in the Android Marketplace, whereupon a third “recommendations tab” will show up in the Heyzap app. You can find it here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Pixable, a startup that develops sleek social photo creation and categorization tools, is adding video discovery and sharing to its social photo aggregation app. Pixable’s Photofeed a Facebook app and companion mobile apps intelligently sorts and categorize your friends’ Facebook, Instagram and Flickr photos. Pixable will use the same technology used for ranking photos to surface videos shared on Facebook, Vimeo and YouTube. What makes Pixable unique is the company’s WonderRank technology, which sorts through a user’s network to learn and find what has interested him in the past, and what might interest him now. The more you engage with Pixable, the “smarter” the app gets, and the better it serves your specific interests and preferences. For now, video discovery is only available in Pixable’s web application and will be extended soon to the startup’s iPad and iPhone apps. Since its launch in January, Pixable’s Photofeed has sorted and ranked over 10 billion photos for its 800,000 users. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In April, 2005, Eric Bahn (a Stanford undergrad at the time) started Beat The Gmat as a blog about his efforts to study for the GMAT.  It morphed into a general test-prep site attracting about 2 million student visitors a month.  Today, it is launching MBA Watch, which finally gives some teeth to its claim to be the “Social Network For MBAs.”   MBA Watch tries to pull together all the information about business schools and applicants in one place.  MBA hopefuls can follow different schools like Harvard, Stanford, or Wharton (the site launches with 20 top business schools today).  It creates the equivalent of a Facebook Wall for each school, pulling in official blog posts, Facebook Fan page updates, and Tweets about the school.  You can toggle the stream between official sources and everyone talking about the school. The site also pulls together general stats like number of applicants, range of GMAT scores, and student demographics, as well as rankings and articles.   On the applicant side, MBA Watch encourages members to share their own stats so that everyone can see who they are competing against.  For each school, it will show a snapshot of average GMAT scores, average age, average years of work experience, and breakdowns by industry and college major.  While not everyone applying for an MBA will feel comfortable sharing this kind of information, many already do on Beat The GMAT’s active forums.  With MBA Watch, it is simply structuring that data and showing aggregate scores. Beat the GMAT already attracts an active community of pre-MBAs, and makes most of its money from sending students to formal test prep courses.  With only four employees, it is on track to make between 700,000 to $1 million in revenues this year, up from $500,000 last year.  And it’s completely bootstrapped.  “I’ve only put $4 into the business to buy the Beat the GMAT domain name for 6 months,” says Bahn.  He teamed up with David Park, a former McKinsey consultant with a computer science degree from MIT and a Harvard Law degree, who is now CEO.  “Neither of us ever went to business school,” says Park.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in March 2010, WePay launched to the public as a group-payments platform — one that makes it easy to coordinate things like fraternity dues and bills that you share with your roommates. They’ve since expanded to offer event ticketing and support for donations, and today they’re launching a feature that puts it in even more direct competition with PayPal: WePay Stores. The feature lets any site integrate a storefront by inserting an embed code (sites can tweak the appearance of their new storefront using CSS). No merchant account is required to set up a store — you’ll just need a WePay account. You can see an example of a store at Startuptees, which has been using it for the last week. There are already other solutions that do this, but CEO Bill Clerico says that WePay Stores is easier for site-owners to implement because WePay is handling both the storefront and the transaction (other solutions often rely on a third-party, like PayPal, to handle the payment processing, so they can be more complex to set up). As for solutions like Shopify, Clerico says there are typically monthly fees involved with the storefront, in addition to payment processing fees. WePay is only charging for the payments (fees are 3.5% of transactions with no per-transaction cost), and sees the stores as a way to increase transaction volume. Ultimately, though, it’s probably in your best interest to compare the fees associated with each store, as your ideal candidate will depend on how much your average price point is. In addition to the embeddable store, WePay is also launching a Stores API that will let websites create merchant accounts on the fly (which is useful when a site wants to let users accept transactions). Other alternatives to WePay include Etsy and Weebly, both of which let you set up a storefront without having to know how to actually build a webpage.Latest headlines delivered to you daily Beepl, a startup that bills itself as an expertise platform and semantic technology company (with a straight face, no less!), has raised seed funding from Prague-based VC firm Credo Ventures. Beepl was co-founded by chief executive Steve O’Hear, who just left TechCrunch to get a taste of tech startup life, and even he wouldn’t tell us how much they’ve raised other than to say it was a “six figure amount”. He should have known better, because we’ve learned from sources that the capital raised amounts to approximately $400,000 (sorry, Steve!). Comprised of a founding team from Slovakia, the United Kingdom and the Czech Republic, Beepl was incorporated in April 2011 and is headquartered in London. The company will be in stealth mode for the next few months, but from what I’ve gathered they’re building a platform that will enable users to get quality answers to their questions, as well as opinions from relevant topic experts, enthusiasts and their social graph. In PR lingo, the way they plan to pull this off sounds something like this:  “Beepl achieves this through a bespoke semantic engine that employs natural language processing and machine learning to both understand the topics that questions relate to and users’ interests and expertise.” A better Q&A mousetrap, in other words, or dare we say, a better Quora? We’ll find out soon enough. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gogobot is a truly special startup. Beautifully designed and very useful are two things that are rarely found together, but Gogobot has both. We first covered them last year. But they didn’t unveil the product – a place to create and consume reviews and photos from real people about places they’ve traveled to – until November 2010.  The service makes it extremely easy to rate and comment on restaurants, hotels and other places you visit while traveling. You can search for the content – which is much cleaner and more useful than you’ll find on places like Travelocity (see for example their results for Maui hotels or things to do in Rome), and it’s easy to click a button and add things you see recommended to your itinerary.  But the fun part is creating content. GogoBot makes it simple to do that. Foursquare and Facebook integration allows the service to monitor where you publicly check-in, and then prompt you later to leave a review. And Gogobot automatically groups your photos and reviews from a trip into an album. Until now though those collections/albums/passports weren’t all that pretty to look at (see screenshot here).  The new feature is called Travel Collections. Your trips are published in a beautiful Flipboard-like layout. The new feature allows users to share their adventures in a format rich with color and context – an enhanced scrapbook for the digital age. Users can share their photos, reviews and other details about the places they stayed, dined, and traveled from the Gogobot site. The new Collections layout also allows users to seamlessly integrate their activities from other social media sites – including their check- ins on Facebook and Foursquare – and professional photos from Gogobot. All of these elements are packaged into pages about each place, allowing friends to learn more about your trip , see a map of where you were when you caught that sunset, or even make a reservation at the hotel where you stayed. These elements are presented in a clean and elegant format with an interactive map that allows users to share vacations with their social networks in a streamlined, beautifully packaged layout, while making it easy for friends to use this information to plan their own trips. You can also view trips via a new map feature that shows where everything is, to get better context around the trip and when you went where, as well as other hotels, restaurants and attractions nearby. See CEO Travis Katz’s London album and click “map view” at the top to see how this works. There’s no better way to share vacation photos and recommendations that I’ve seen.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quepasa, the Facebook for Latinos has merged with social networking company myYearbook for $100 million, approximately $82 million of hin Quepasa common stock and approximately $18 million in cash.  MyYearbook, which has raised $17 million in funding, is a profitable social network that focuses on younger teenage users. While still smaller than Facebook, myYearbook is seeing over 1 billion page views on mobile platforms and 1.2 billion page views on the web each month. In fact, it is the top web site in the comScore Teens category with more visits, minutes, and pageviews.  In 2010, myYearbook generated $23.7 million in revenue, up 53% year-over-year, and EBITDA of $4.9 million, up 315% year-over-year. Quepasa says more than 27 million registered users. The combined properties will have 70 million registered users, 2.2 million mobile app installs, 11.5 million mobile game installs, and 2.1 million social same installs. Quepasa CEO, John Abbott says that the acquisition and merger doubles the size of Quepasa’s existing user base, and also could represent a new growth area for Quepasa’s mobile and social games, advertising, and virtual currency. MyYearbook also recently launched a gaming portal. Following the merger, myYearbook CEO Geoff Cook will serve as Chief Operating Officer of Quepasa Corporation and President of its Consumer Internet Division, and will also join the company’s Board of Directors.  Here’s the note Cook sent to myYearbook employees this morning: Dear Team, Today myYearbook signed a “definitive agreement” to merge with Quepasa (QPSA), a publicly traded company.  Because it is publicly traded and to limit legal and regulatory concerns, I was not able to personally inform everyone of this ahead of time, as I would have preferred to do, but I do want to let everyone know why I am so excited by this merger and by the opportunity we have to build an enduring, global brand for meeting new people. Before I get into the logic behind the merger, I want to assure every one of a few important facts:Your job remains safe.  Our intention with this merger is to continue to grow, and grow faster, not to make cuts. Your job is as secure as it was a month ago, a year ago, or in the case of many of you, five years ago. The job postings we have up are staying up. We will continue to aggressively grow.Our culture isn’t changing. A product-first mindset, a commitment to tackling hard technical projects and getting things live, a culture of mutual respect, dinner for people who stay late, free gym memberships, all-you-can-drink caffeine, company-wide lunches, open-door policies, softball teams with more heart than talent, our location, and all the other little things that make this company great, will not change.I am not going anywhere. I view this deal as a stepping-stone to building a billion-dollar global brand around social discovery. As President of the Consumer Internet Division and Chief Operating Officer of the combined company, I will have responsibility for both myYearbook.com and Quepasa.com. I will also be joining the Quepasa Board along with 2 other Board members who have a history of supporting myYearbook.I want to build this company into a billion-dollar brand around social discovery and meeting new people. I believe Quepasa’s large user base in emerging markets, and talented, 40-person social game studio are important pieces of the puzzle that will ensure we are the ones who own meeting new people across the world. I believe this combination is the quickest path to global leadership in social discovery, and I look forward to continuing to work with all of you to build our team, our culture, and ultimately our brand to delight users. I see this as a doubling-down on our ability to build great products, to monetize, and ultimately to create meaningful relationships among our members. There is a reason we have grown our business profitably while navigating the same waters that capsized Bebo, Myspace, and so many other social networks: each other. We have a team that delivers, and we have a culture that works. As much promise as I see, this was not an easy decision.  I know full well how hard it is to build a $30 million revenue business profitably with over 100 talented people. I realize how hard it is to attract the talent and build the culture we have here. But I also know how hard it is go from where we are now to building an enduring brand that people the world over know and love. And to do that, we need to embrace change. With this deal we will become the public-market leader in social discovery. Now, it’s up to us to continue to deliver. Support from our Board and investors has made all the difference in helping to grow myYearbook from a few hundred students in Montgomery High School in Skillman, NJ to over 32.7 million registered users today. Terry and Eva Herndon, who many of you may not know, have backed the company from the very beginning and supported my previous company before that. They offered their thoughts on this combination: “As founding funders of two of Geoff’s companies, Eva and I are very excited by the immense growth potential for myYearbook in the Western Hemisphere.   We certainly appreciate all that myYearbook’s team have done to bring the company this far this fast and look forward to the creativity still ahead.” Meanwhile, Rick Lewis, our long-time partner from US Venture Partners, an established early-stage VC fund, demonstrates his continued support by agreeing to join the Board of the new company as well. We know what we’ve built over the last 5 years and how special it is, and I believe we can continue to build on it. Only a small fraction of companies start from nothing and are able to attract venture capital. Of those, only 5-10% have values of $100 million or more. We’re already a couple of standard deviations past the typical startup, now it’s time to go for a few more and believe that we can be truly dominant – that we are as prepared as anyone to create the market for meeting new people in a world increasingly shaped by social, by mobile, and by location. I don’t consider this an exit or the end. I consider it the end of the beginning, and I believe we have a lot more innovative products to create.  I urge anyone who has questions or wants to speak more about this to come see me over the next few weeks and months There will be company-wide meetings led by Jim in New Hope and Bill in New York this morning. Sometime shortly after that, my hope is we can all get back to business quickly, building cool stuff, and staying focused on the task at hand.  Sincerely, Geoff CookCEO, myYearbook Latest headlines delivered to you daily Travel and expense management company Concur, which earlier this year acquired TripIt and GlobalExchange, has invested $5 million in Yapta, a provider of airfare and hotel rate tracking services. The investment brings the total of capital raised by Yapta to $13.8 million. As part of the investment agreement, Concur and Yapta have entered into a partnership under which Concur will exclusively use Yapta’s airfare price tracking and price assurance services for its TripIt Pro users. The parties also plan to explore additional opportunities for integrating Yapta’s services with Concur’s travel and expense management solutions.  Last April, Concur struck a similar deal with Indian online travel site Cleartrip, in which the company invested $40 million. According to the press release, Yapta’s technology has conducted more than a billion price checks on millions of flights, revealing more than $350 million in savings for travelers. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Viber, which lets iPhone users call and send messages to contacts over 3G and WiFi, free of charge, has been teasing its Android app for a while now.  Last May, the VoIP startup finally released an Android app in beta, but only to a limited subset of some 50,000 users. Today, they’re officially launching the application for all. The app includes several features exclusives to the Android version, such as a full call screen whenever a Viber call is received, pop-up text message notifications and a default dialer setting that enables users to use the Viber dialer for all their phone calls. Viber also announced that it has acquired over 12 million active users (last 30 days, out of 20 million registered users) and has a call traffic volume of over one billion minutes of calls per quarter.  On average, the company says, active users talk on Viber for 11 million minutes per day, with an average of 6 minutes per call.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past 18 months, Ness Computing has been very quietly working on some new technology that they believe will be the next big thing in search. It’s a new, highly personalized search engine that they hope to launch in the coming weeks. But first, they’re happy to announce they’ve been given $5 million in funding to fulfill this vision. Vinod Khosla and Ramy Adeeb of Khosla Ventures led the Series A round, with participation from Alsop Louie Partners, TomorrowVentures, Bullpen Capital, a co-founder of Palantir Technologies, and some angel investors. The Alsop-incubated company is sometimes described as the “Palantir for fun,” Ness CEO and co-founder Corey Reese says. “If you use search products today there’s plenty of things for solving objective inquiries. But what about things that are more subjective?,” Reese says. “What about, ‘what’s best for me?’. Is there a concert this weekend that I should go to?,” he continues. What Ness is building will attempt to answer these inquires. He notes that over the past 18 months, they’ve pulled together a team of 15 to work on this. Part of it has involved building what is essentially a recommendation engine that uses machine learning when looking at social data from Facebook, Twitter, Foursquare, Gowalla, and other places. The other part is the actual search engine to serve up useful results based on these signals. Reese calls this combination their “Likeness Engine”. This name comes from both your “liking” of things online, and your digital “likeness”. In fact, this is where the “Ness” in their name also comes from. With the Likeness Engine in mind, Ness secured the likeness.com domain, where you can sign up now to learn more about the company when they’re ready to talk a bit more. “Google did a great job organizing the world’s data, but we’re about organizing opportunities,” Reese says. He notes that they’re in a much better position to do this than someone like Google because there are so many different social signals out there, and politics prevents Google from access all of them (like some Facebook data, for example). Because they’re independent, when a new service, like Google+ emerges, Ness can quickly add that data to their mix, Reese notes. Further, Ness’ first product will focus on the mobile space. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Crowd-funding website Kickstarter has put up an interesting retrospective post today in honor of their 10,000th successfully-funded project (an Ohio band putting together a 7″ if you’re curious). We were privy to some of these numbers (or their predecessors, anyway) when co-founder Yancey Stickler and some successful project creators took to the stage at Disrupt NYC, but now they’re here in graph and blog form for those who missed the panel. The growth of the site is remarkable: it has funded the same number of projects in the last month as they did in their whole first year (1044). The trends seem to show some areas leveling out, but that may not be a bad thing. We tend to look for the tech-related projects (today I posted the gorgeous Pen Type A) more than the far more popular media projects, so we have a bit of a skewed perspective on the site: the things we see are often on the more expensive and more rarely funded end of the scale, as they often require prototyping, manufacturing, and packaging. But a huge majority of the projects are in fact music and film. Fashion and games join tech at the bottom of the list, perhaps because those tend to find other avenues of bootstrapping. One eloquent graph shows the decline in number of days required to achieve $5 million in pledges:  As you can see, it’s bottoming out. Steady growth in this display yields diminishing returns, as it will take quite a few people if they want to reduce that number from 23 to 20. And this graph shows a sudden peak in projects successfully funded (note that these graphs refer to different time periods, so don’t draw any conclusions by lining them up vertically):  That could be for a number of reasons, though Strickler and Benenson (who authored the post) offer no explanation. I would hazard a guess that they are reaching the efficiency ceiling for their staff and layout. With over 300 projects being submitted a day (according to Strickler in May), approving and monitoring them is more than a full-time job. It’s possible that the way the site is organized doesn’t scale effectively beyond this volume of projects (like app and grocery stores, where at some point the multiplicity of options makes finding what you want more difficult), but it could also be for another reason beyond the scope of the data they have revealed. Whether Kickstarter attempts to resume that sharp growth it’s seen in the last year or whether it decides to streamline and make it a more curated experience is entirely up to them. I’d like it either way; I’m no fan of growth for growth’s sake. The next year should be an interesting one for them. Lastly, check out this blink-inducing video of all 10,000 successful projects’ pages: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Blurb, a startup that lets you create customized books, is launching a new integration today that allows you to create professional-looking photo books of all of your Instagram photos.  Blurb says the integration creates professional quality images and printing as the company automatically increases the resolution of Instagram camera phone images to ensure they will print properly. You can choose from a variety of sizing, paper types and formats, with pricing starting at under $11. To create a book, users can sign into their Instagram account on Blrub. The most popular image, based on the number of Instagram “likes,” is added to the cover. The most recent photos are then autoflowed into a book that can be previewed and purchased or edited using Blurb’s online bookmaking tool, Bookify.  Instagram has been on a roll. The photo sharing service has well over 5 million users now and roughly 100 million photos have been shared using the app to date. The ability to create books form your Instagram photos is actually compelling because the photo sharing app allows you to apply a variety of filters to your photos to make them more visually beautiful or interesting. Keepsy also allows you to create photo books from your Instagram photos.   Check out another Instagram-related app, Instacolor, here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily SupersonicAds, a startup founded by former executives of social video site Metacafe in 2010, has landed $4.2 million in financing in its first institutional funding round, which was led by Greylock Israel. The company has raised over $6 million in total funding to date. SupersonicAds will use the fresh cash to expand the international presence of its monetization solution for social games, BrandConnect, which it says is currently used by brands like Disney, Kellogg’s and Hasbro. Basically, the solution helps marketers run video and branded widget advertising within social games and lets users earn virtual currency for engagement. Through integration with the Facebook Platform, the startup provides brand engagement campaigns and direct response offers for Facebook Credits. Greylock Israel partner Yoram Snir will join the board of SupersonicAds.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Autodesk, maker of design, engineering and entertainment software, this morning announced that it has acquired online photo editing and sharing service Pixlr. Financial terms of the transaction were not disclosed, but Autodesk says the transaction is not expected to have any impact on its recently issued guidance.  Pixlr founder Ola Sevandersson has joined Autodesk. Pixlr was started in Sweden in August 2008 and offers a suite of cloud-based image tools and utilities such as photo editing tool Pixlr Editor, Pixlr-O-Matic, screengrabbing browser extensions Pixlr Grabber and one-click photo sharing tool imm.io.  The company’s tools are built to enable non-professionals to create, edit, and share images online via social networking services such as Facebook and Flickr.  For Autodesk, the acquisition is a way to expand its line of products for consumers with image editing capabilities. Autodesk SketchBook Pro desktop users, for example, will now be able to read and write image file formats such as PXD and exchange files while maintaining data such as layers. The acquisition is reminiscent of Google’s purchase of Picnik back in March 2010. Other alternative online photo editing services include FotoFlexer, LunaPic, Splashup and Pixenate. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – JOOR, a member-only online wholesale marketplace for contemporary fashion brands and boutiques, has raised $2.25 million in Series A funding in a round led by Battery Ventures with participation from Lerer Ventures, Great Oaks VC, Landis Capital, Forerunner Ventures, William M. Smith and Richard Mishaan. Led by founder Mona Bijoor, a veteran fashion buyer, the company will use the additional capital to expand internationally and grow its network of boutiques, buyers and fashion brands. JOOR creates a relatively new type of sales channel for retail fashion buyers and brands, by bringing the experience of trade shows and showrooms to a digital platform in an effort to save fashion brands and buyers a lot of valuable time, and from a ton of hassle. The B2B marketplace, which is available only to accepted members, lets fashion brands connect with independent boutiques and other wholesale buyers to communicate and transact online.  Its strength is in the network. Launched in March 2010, JOOR has grown from working with 75 brands and 500 boutiques to over 250 brands and more than 7,500 boutiques. Similar marketplaces include Not Just A Lookbook, Erayo, Trunkt and Balluun.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Docusign, the cloud-based electronic signature platform, today announced that is has processed more than a half billion pages of “contracts, agreements and other legally binding documents”, all as part of its effort to enable businesses to go paperless in the document sharing and signing process. According to the company, this effort has saved more than 60,000 trees, and what would equate to $10 million in shipping costs. To commemorate the milestone, DocuSign has made a donation to the Arbor Day Foundation to preserve one million square feet of rain forest. DocuSign also announced today the release of the latest edition of its eSignature solution, including the first appearance of a free version. This update to platform will bring DocuSign users the ability to “tag documents, auto-save, and make use of HTML5 enhancements”, the team said, like the ability to drag and drop files into DocuSign’s envelope to send, as well as pull documents from Box.net, Dropbox, Google Docs and Salesforce. DocuSign’s new solution will also include interactive dashboards and reporting to let users know where documents stand in the review and signing process, and browser-aware localization, which will put documents in the user’s native language based on the user’s browser. Most notably, DocuSign now includes integration with social networks, allowing users to sign in with Facebook, LinkedIn, Paypal, and Salesforce. Lastly, DocuSign will be offering its users a free edition of its platform, in which they can sign up for a free account and receive 5-free “sends” (documents sent and signed) per month, with no credit card required. Because the electronic signatures company now has over 8 million DocuSigners, when Adobe entered the eSignature space  last year, DocuSign welcomed the addition “as market validation”. But, yesterday, Adobe announced the acquisition of EchoSign, an eSignature solution with over 3 million users, which it plans to integrate into its document software. This could symbolize some serious future competition for DocuSign, and it’s interesting to see DocuSign’s announcements today follow so closely on the heels of Adobe’s announcement. However, Tim Gonser, DocuSign’s CEO, told TechFlash that the company still leads as a solution for enterprise customers, with “80 percent SaaS market share”. It also benefits from significant adoption resulting from a partnership and investment from the National Association of Realtors, according to TechFlash. It also helps that DocuSign raised $27 million from Scale Venture Partners, Salesforce.com, Sigma Partners, Ignition Partners and Frazier Technology in December of last year, bringing total capital raised to just over $56 million. Check out the additions here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Komli Media, a major digital media network operator in the Asian-Pacific region, this morning announced that it has acquired ZestADZ, a mobile advertising platform, expanding the suite of solutions it can offers clients to encompass display, video, search, social media and now mobile. Terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. ZestADZ is a product of a mobile marketing company called mobile-worx. The company is based in Chennai, India with offices in the United States (Los Angeles and Des Moines). Mobile-worx was founded in 2007 and is led by entrepreneur Asif Ali, who will be heading Komli’s newly formed mobile division together with VP Amit Bhartiya. ZestADZ essentially helps advertisers and agencies deliver targeted mobile advertising campaigns to drive brand awareness, generate traffic and leads, among other options, across feature phones and smartphone platforms such as iPhone, Android, and Windows Mobile.  eMarketer estimates Asia Pacific mobile internet users to nearly double from 623 million in 2011 to more than 1.22 billion in 2015. At the end of 2015, it is estimated that one out of every two mobile users worldwide will reside in Asia Pacific.  Within India, eMarketer pegs the mobile internet penetration at 40 million users currently, and expects it to grow to over 200 million users by 2016. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Sometimes, it’s easy for power users to get drunk on that power. I’m as guilty of this as anyone. When I constantly bitch that my Gmail account is SO DAMN SLOW, I forget that I also have a full 20 GB of email — something which Google PR always kindly reminds me is not normal. (And I came up with my own solution — quitting email entirely.) Robert Scoble is perhaps the consummate power user. Every time a new service launches, he quickly friends or follows as many people as he can, testing the limits. Then he inevitably bitches when limits are hit, or the service doesn’t work well with that many connections. Because, you know, most people don’t have 30,000 friends. (Nor does Scoble — but that’s another matter.) Anyway, Scoble is the king of power using a product to its breaking point and then complaining about it. One recent example: Scoble complaining that Quora isn’t really any good as a blogging platform — a straw man argument that he himself set up, no less. This weekend, he was back at it. And the victim of his rage this time was a familiar one: Twitter. In a post entitled, “Google+ has made Twitter boring, here’s what Twitter should do about that“, Scoble goes on a long-ish rant about what features Twitter needs to add immediately to compete with the just-launched Google+. Missing in this rant is one very critical thing: introspection. Scoble fails to recognize that he is a power user to the Nth degree. Put more bluntly: if Twitter is batshit crazy enough to implement even half of the things that Scoble lays out, they will effectively kill their own product. Of course, we can rest-assured knowing that Twitter is very likely not this foolish. After being in business for a full five years, they must know by now that their strength is not to mimic every just-launched and hot-right-now new social network (in this case, Google+). Their strength is to remain true to what got them to where they are now: simplicity. That’s not to say Twitter should not add new functionality or improve upon their service. Of course they should. But if they added some of the things Scoble suggests like adding Twylah information (really?), removing the pushing of links from other services, and re-creating Google+ Circles for Twitter, a product that many people already don’t use after signing up would become completely unusable for most people. Twitter is not Google+. Nor does it need to be. If they tried to make it into Google+ on the fly, the millions of current users would rightfully throw a shit-fit. I have a feeling that Scoble would too. In a guest post this weekend, Tom Anderson (more affectionately known as “MySpace Tom”) made the key point that many people often overlook — most services aren’t killed by competitors, they kill themselves. Facebook didn’t kill MySpace, MySpace killed itself (through mismanagement). MySpace didn’t kill Friendster, Friendster killed itself (through scaling issues). The truth is that Twitter almost did kill itself a few years ago also due to scaling issues. But for whatever reason, none of their competitors were able to capitalize and Twitter emerged, stronger. But Twitter trying to become Google+ would lead to their death. It would be them killing themselves. And while you could argue that them doing nothing in the face of Google+ could also lead to them killing themselves, I think that’s way too early to call. And it assumes Twitter is not doing anything to improve their product — which is ridiculous. Let’s look at Scoble’s ideas, step by step. “First Experience” Scoble says that when a user first looks at Google+ versus Twitter, Twitter seems boring. That might be true for some, but the opposite is true for others. I’ve talked to many people who take one look at Google+ and think it looks like a nightmare of content. He’s right in that Twitter needs to do something more to get users engaged when they first sign up. But they know this. It’s probably their biggest problem (well, perhaps beyond monetization). The solution is not to fundamentally change your product though. Implementing Twylah would be way too confusing for most users and unnecessary. Revamping Twitter Lists would also not work for most users (more on that in a bit). Getting rid of spam is constantly a problem, there’s no arguing there. Scoble suggests they filter results by Klout score, I suspect Twitter will eventually do something like this (though I think they have their own internal scores of that nature). “Pictures & Videos” Um, Twitter did just launch a major entry in the photos space. If it’s deemed important enough, I’m sure the same will be true of videos. Scoble seems upset that images and videos aren’t shown inline in your Tweet stream (instead, they’re one click away in the right column on twitter.com). Again, I suspect that there are at least as many people who would hate that feature, as would like it. Twitter’s current scan-ability (the ability to quickly scan over content) is great because it’s streamlined. Google+, by comparison, is horrible. This was effectively illustrated by Mike Monteiro a few weeks ago. This is a preference. And maybe Twitter will offer this option eventually. But by default, this would make a lot of current users want to vomit. Like me, for example. “Controls Over Content Distribution” What Scoble wants here is the equivalent of Google+ Circles. He wants to be able to message just a few Twitter users at a time, and groups of them. But this is not what Twitter is about. Twitter (for the most part) is a public broadcast system. This has served them well — while others, like Facebook, have moved more in this direction. Google+ is taking a different approach with Circles (though it still has a Public channel which basically everyone I know seems to be using). Scoble wants Twitter to revamp the little-used Lists product to be more like Circles. But I’d argue that would not work. I’m still not sold that the Circles concept will work the way Google hopes it does long term. Right now, people are enjoying the ease of setting up these groups, but maintaining them will be hard. Further, as Twitter’s own Kevin Cheng argued this weekend on his personal blog (and well before Scoble’s post), it’s not clear that organizing your friends in a digital way will ever fully work. Social groups often have too much of a gray line (which Cheng calls a “soft line”). Fred Wilson takes this a step further, saying that beyond family and co-workers, which are well-defined groups, all groups change over time, and without automation far beyond what we see now, grouping largely will not work. Google may have solved the “no one wants to make lists” problem, but it very much remains to be seen if they’ve solved the larger fundamental issue. I’m skeptical. And while I love Twitter lists (for populating Flipboard, in particular), I know that most users simply do not take the time to make them. Nor am I sure they ever would/should, even if the right interface is there. This. Is. A. Pure. Power. User. Problem. — At least for Twitter. “No Auto-Pushing Of Content” Scoble is following 32,297 people on Twitter. That’s 31,600 more people than me, and I’m also a power user. When he complains that “I look at Twitter and a lot of it has turned into a boring RSS feed,” why doesn’t he, you know, unfollow a few hundred of those accounts that are just pumping in RSS content — like the TechCrunch account, for example? Because that would be an easy solution, and he doesn’t think he should have to change his completely outrageous use-cases. The fact is that many people use Twitter for just this purpose. I increasingly use Twitter to replace my RSS reader, for example. If I don’t want to see content pushed in, I unfollow that account. Simple. Further, the thought that if Google+ continues to gain popularity, the same users won’t happen is laughable. Several of our competitors are already blanketing G+ with auto-pushed links. We haven’t been doing that yet just because Google keeps saying they’d prefer we wait until they have their proper business accounts set up (any day now, Google). This is going to happen. A lot. Welcome to the world of distribution tools. “You Can See Who You Excited And Who You Pissed Off” Okay, I don’t even know where to start here, so I’ll keep it short and sweet. This is mainly about ego, but it’s also another power user feature that would just piss off a bunch of regular users. “The Posts Autoflow” Scoble, you use a Mac, download Twitter for Mac. Boom. Done. Seriously though, Twitter used to have this as a feature back in the day. They turned it off as scaling became an issue. They certainly could turn it on again, but they’ve deliberately made the call not to. Certainly, they have a reason for this. They also just bought TweetDeck, which also does this. So maybe they view it (like TweetDeck itself) as, surprise, surprise, a power user feature. Also, while Google+ does auto-flow, I find the functionality to be extremely buggy right now. Sometimes my stream auto-updates, sometimes it does not. Often, I have to refresh to see the latest comments, +1s, etc. This actually pisses me off more than I find it useful. I’m sure Google will figure it out — FriendFeed had this nailed back in the day. Twitter Is Not Google+ Let me just wrap this up by stating the obvious: Twitter is not Google+. If it tried to be, it would be the suicide of a massively popular product — one the freaking President of the United States uses — one Apple just handed the keys of iOS to. In my opinion, Twitter’s rise can be directly attributable to something which is the opposite of everything Scoble is asking for: simplicity. Twitter’s core concept is the extension of simple, short messages throughout the past many decades. The postcard begat the SMS message begat the IM status message begat Twitter. Sometimes the simplest ideas resonate because of the very fact that they are simple. Twitter has had a few moments in their history where they had to add a feature that would make the service more complicated — like the new-style retweets, for example — and they were able to pull it off, but it was a rough-going transition for a bit. Imagine if they tried to tack-on some of these other things Scoble is suggesting? Actually, don’t bother. Because Twitter is not going to commit suicide any time soon. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Email is an essential part of our daily communication, but it can also be a real pain in the ass. Or, going one step further, as my colleague MG Siegler recently put it, “email is the absolute devil”. This fact even prompted him to channel Peter Gibbons and quit email altogether. I, personally, applaud this bold move but, instead of taking a vow of abstinence, am turning to other tools to help find a way to funnel the fire hose. Of course, this problem is not new, and many startups and products have tried to climb Mount Email, many with little success. While it will take a near-divine intervention for me to declare a winner in this fight, Taskforce, a member of the Y Combinator Winter Class of 2011, is taking a better shot than most other tools I’ve used. (You can check out our February profile of the startup here.) Taskforce offers an extension that integrates with Gmail to convert your emails into task lists and makes it simple to create reminders. Appearing out of your inbox like a tall Google toolbar, Taskforce, perhaps more importantly comes with collaboration and calendar tools, enabling you to add collaborators, set due dates, and comment on and hide tasks that don’t need to be completed immediately.  When you add a collaborator to a task, Taskforce alerts them to the shared task and if you make updates to the collaborated tasks, it sends further alerts — and your collaborators don’t have to be using Taskforce. (These collaborative functions are what sets it apart from GTasks.) And even though it adds buttons to your emails allowing you to convert them to tasks, Taskforce doesn’t actually access your inbox. Everything happens through the extension. Since going into beta in February, Taskforce Founders Niccolo Pantucci and Courtland Allen have been poring over feedback from users and are today officially stepping out of beta to launch publicly. They’ve added a few more features to flesh out the extension’s usability.  Taskforce has introduced a mobile app and are now unveiling a paid version of the service, called Taskforce Pro, which includes a number of additions, including collaborative lists that enable light-weight project management to be carried out in teams, GTasks sync to enable tasks to be pushed from Taskforce into GTasks as well as GCal. Pro will also allow users to reprioritize tasks that they can choose the order in which they work on their to-do lists, take advantage of keyboard shortcuts, as well as (and importantly) the ability to maximize and minimize the size and presentation of the Taskforce in-email app — a much requested feature according to Pantucci, including by yours truly.  Pantucci also told me that Taskforce has seen great early user adoption, with numbers in the “tens of thousands” of signups, including some by “some very well known tech companies”. Although the founders declined to share specific notable users this early in the game, we were able to find out that a particular company that just recently launched its music service in the U.S. has become an active Taskforce user.  In terms of funding, as part of YC’s class of 2011, Taskforce was included in Yuri Milner’s no-strings-attached convertible debt investment offer of $150K, which the startup accepted. And thanks to Taskforce’s incubation at Y Combinator, the founders were advised by Paul Buchheit, who is a Partner at YC and also happens to be the creator of Gmail. Taskforce Pro provides the startup with a great opportunity to begin monetizing, and Pantucci said that, when the founders bounced the idea off of early adopters, many said that they would welcome a paid option. Pro will initially be priced at $5 a month, and all Taskforce users will have access to Pro’s features for the first 30 days of using the service, whereafter users will be asked to pay. Those who continue with the free version still have access to Taskforce’s core features — on Chrome, Firefox, and Safari.  Next stop: Taking Taskforce beyond task management, pushing integration with other tools, like Dropbox, for example. Document management is a possibility as well. To learn more, visit Taskforce at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It wasn’t even a month ago when we broke the news that beRecruited would be acquiring former Y Combinator startup Fanvibe. At the time, Fanvibe’s Vishwas Prabhakara, set to become the new CEO of beRecruited with the deal, said that Fanvibe would continue to operate with its roughly 100,000 users. What a difference a few weeks make. Effective immediately, Fanvibe will cease operations, Prabhakara confirms. Why the sudden change of heart? The ongoing NFL and NBA lockouts have effectively destroyed the point of the service, Prabhakara says. While the NFL lockout has been rumored to be ending for weeks now, it still continues on (once again, a deal is rumored to happen later this week — don’t hold your breath). Meanwhile, the NBA lockout shows no signs of ending, and it definitely could wipe out at least a part of the upcoming season. The threat of no games in the upcoming months was simply too much for beRecruited, so they made the call to pull the plug. When I noted the constant rumors of the NFL lockout ending, Prabhakara says it has already taken too big of a toll. Apparently, a number of the NFL’s digital staffers were laid off or have left during the lockout. “They are now way behind on the digital stuff,” Prabhakara says, also noting that their main contact left to become the head of sports and entertainment marketing at JP Morgan Chase. This turn of events serves as an interesting reminder that outside variables can quickly destroy a startup. Of course, Fanvibe was fortunate to sell itself in time (perhaps not coincidentally — but Prabhakara assures me this “wasn’t our plan”). “We’re going to put our focus on the growth of beRecruited for the the near future, while leveraging some of the backend stuff we built for Fanvibe,” Prabakara says. Update: Says the NFL: We are not laying off people. In fact, NFL.com is hiring and getting prepared for the 2011 NFL season. Prabhakara’s comments about us that were from his contact that is no longer at the NFL. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Cardagin Networks, the creators of a mobile loyalty and advertising platform, announced today that it has raised a $4.25 million series A-1 round of funding. The round was led by private and angel investors from New York, Tennessee, Georgia, and Virginia. The startup raised a $1 million series A back in March of 2010, bringing total investment to $5.25 million. Cardagin will use its new infusion of capital to ramp up product development and hiring efforts. The Virginia-based network created its proprietary mobile platform to allow small, local merchants and businesses to design, scale, and monetize their mobile loyalty platforms, while providing their users with quick access to rewards and exclusive promotions.  Just as Sundrop Mobile, a startup whose raise we wrote about in March, offers daily deal merchants the ability to capture data and encourage loyalty among its avid users, Cardagin offers businesses a self-service platform built to publish mobile ads in realtime to loyal consumers. Cardagin and Sundrop both are trying to hit on the main deficiency of the Groupon model, in that local merchants are largely dissatisfied with the level of retention and repeat business they received from daily deal promotions. Thus, with Cardagin, local businesses can begin linking coupon distribution to coupon redemption through analytic data and a custom dashboard, allowing them to make smarter marketing decisions based on customer purchasing history.  Cardagin allows merchants to identify consumers in proximity via mobile GPS, serve them with ads in realtime on-site. And, for all those consumers interested in discounts, a big selling point for the startup’s platform is that, simply by signing up on its homepage, users can access a “virtual mall” populated by businesses in their vicinity offering mobile promotions and loyalty programs.  Rob Masri, Founder and CEO of Cardagin, said that the platform and mobile app were developed and tested in Charlottesville, Virginia, where the company is based, and launched officially to the public in January of this year. Since then, the startup has signed up nearly 1,000 businesses and, with this latest round of investment in its pocket, will begin rolling out the platform to cities across the U.S. For more, visit Cardagin Networks at home here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Contently, a platform that connects brands with quality content and gives freelance writers the shot at a regular paycheck, announced today that it has closed a $335K debt round from Founder Collective. This comes on the heels of the news that TechStars had chosen Contently to be one of the 12 startups to take part in its New York City summer program, which began last week.  The startup is keying into the idea that content farms have become the bane of content production, spamming search engines with low-quality, SEO-optimized content that takes up space rather than inform. Contently hopes to fight this trend by building a business around real engaging, sharable content, rather than an anonymous, outsourced engine intended to game search algorithms.  As marketing dollars shift towards social media and content marketing (according to Custom Content Council, 68 percent of CMOs are shifting marketing budgets to focus on content marketing), and simultaneously, as digital content production ushers in a new era where many bloggers and journalists are now managing freelance careers, Contently’s value is twofold. On the one hand, Contently wants to help web marketers build content strategies optimized for readers online, based on content produced by real, accredited journalists. Contently believes that marketers want to be producing magazine-quality content that does their brands justice, and for that reason, SEO manipulation isn’t a sustainable model for businesses — or those that take advantage of its rapid-fire content production. On the other hand, Contently wants to become a source of steady work for freelance content producers. But, to assure brands that they will be getting quality content, the startup is currently only working with journalists and bloggers who have credentials that include “major publications and well known blogs”. Of course, “major” and “well known” are in the eye of the beholder, but Contently Co-founder Shane Snow says that writers from Boston Globe, Gawker, LA Times, New York Times, and Wired are already on board. For its writers, the New York City-based startup is setting the minimum publishers pay for the work they produce to ensure that they won’t be given $10 gigs, a la Demand Media. Snow says that writers who blog full-time for Contently can make make more than $50K a year, a bold statement, considering that 66 percent of journalists make less than that.  Contently then aims to become a hub, where journalists can manage their careers, without having to worry about vetting clients or whoring themselves out for little money just to pay the rent. Plus, no more late checks. (And they can get bylines like this one.) For businesses, hiring journalists, bloggers, or copy writers in-house is an expensive endeavor, which is why so many have turned to outsourcing production to freelancers. Of course, finding high quality freelancers on Craigslist, Odesk, or Elance can be more time-consuming than hiring in-house. This is where Contently’s value proposition comes into play, offering businesses easy access to quality content and journalists a steady source of revenue. For publishers, these writers become their stringers, Snow says, in a way that’s more like telecommuting than Mechanical Turk-style outsourcing — they want to get rid of the anonymity. “Contently is something that literally every one of our portfolio companies could use”, Founder Collective Managing Partner Eric Paley told us. “Contently makes content marketing turnkey for it’s growing base of clients”. Contently launched its closed beta in December 2010, and has since seen companies like Mint, Grasshopper, and Wix use the startup to hire freelance writers and plan their digital content strategies. For more, check out the startup at home and sign up for here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily You’ve probably by now heard about Bitcoin, the peer-to-peer digital currency based on Satoshi Nakamoto’s infamous self-published essay, that is either a giant scam, a genius and innovative new frontier, or nothing new — depending on whom you ask.  For those unfamiliar, TechCrunch contributor Jon Evans best described it succinctly thus: “Bitcoin is an anonymous online currency whose transactions and monetary supply are verified by digital cryptography and maintained by an open-source peer-to-peer network”. You can read Evan’s post here and his follow up analysis here.  As Evans points out, Bitcoin has been around since 2009, but only recently has the hype engine caught wind of the currency, resulting in a flurry of media coverage, and reactions hot and cold, including U.S. Senator Charles Schumer’s public denouncement of the network as a “money laundering” scheme. The digital currency has evolved in fits and starts, like any early currency and exchange, with the founder of Sweden’s Pirate Party throwing his entire life savings into Bitcoins, while one user had nearly $500K worth of Bitcoinage stolen, and last month we covered the collapse of Mt. Gox, the network’s most popular exchange. Tumult everywhere you turn. Nonetheless, based on the public examples of Mt. Gox’s vulnerabilities, Chad Pankewitz and team have founded a new Bitcoin exchange, called Ruxum, that is dedicated to bringing a more secure alternative for Bitcoin traders. Simply put, Ruxum makes it easy to buy, sell, and trade Bitcoin and virtual currency. And for now it’s free. (Invites herein.) While there is a debate over what exactly to call Bitcoin currency, as it does not fit into existing categories of assets, with some calling it currency, securities, virtual currency, and more, Pankewitz said that he firmly believes Bitcoin can be a disruptive force in currency markets across sovereign borders. In the late ’90s, he says, Pankewitz was the head of eBusiness for Citigroup Private Bank and his team was among the first to build a digital banking solution for high net worth individuals in Europe and also worked on Forex trading systems at Citigroup.  He brought that experience (along with team members from Fortune 500 companies) to Ruxum, where they’ve been developing their competing exchange, designed to bring Wall Street-level security to Bitcoin’s network. What’s more, according to the Pankewitz, Ruxum is the only Bitcoin exchange that has a public security policy, which readers can see here. Today, Ruxum is launching into private beta with a new exchange that will allow users to buy, sell and trade both Bitcoin and Namecoin. Namecoin, for those unfamiliar, is a fork of the Bitcoin project, which uses the P2P network to, instead, build a decentralized domain name system that is less vulnerable to downages. For more on Namecoin, click here. Ruxum will accept real money deposits, with cash payments being made by bank or wire transfers from nearly anywhere in the world. Currently, USD, EUR, GBP and JPY are accepted currencies, with six more coming in the near future, according to the Ruxum founder. Payments to Bitcoin and Namecoin addresses can be made anytime via a user’s Ruxum account.  Trading fees will be turned off during the beta, and users can trade as much as they’d like for free. Ruxum is offering TechCrunch readers 500 invites to its private beta program. Readers can click here, where you can click on the “sign-up” link in the top right. Enter the code “techcrunch” (without the quotes) to create an account. For more, the Ruxum FAQ is here.  Check it out and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online real estate company Move this morning announced that it has acquired SocialBios, which is described as a social search startup although its offering reminds me more of services offered by the likes of Follr, About.me and Flavors.me. SocialBios basically allows both individuals and companies to create a single social hub for their online profiles through interactive ‘About Us’ pages that enable visitors to find shared connections on Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, Foursquare etc. Terms of the deal were not disclosed. For Move, the acquisition of SocialBios means more access to social services it can offer real estate professionals through its vast online network and marketplace.  In the press release, that sounds something like this: Move will leverage the SocialBios platform and talent to develop products that connect people with real estate professionals based on the commonalities of their on- and offline social networks. As part of the acquisition, SocialBios founder Ernie Graham and co-founders Ira McMahon and Andrew Van Tassel have joined the product development team at Move, where the former will head up Move’s social product strategy and development team. Graham will work with Move’s franchise and broker customers to develop ‘social graphing strategies’ that help them facilitate more connections between their agents and brokers with consumers. The SocialBios office and team will be based in Denver, Colorado, and its website, products and brand will remain in production and available to real estate professionals.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Vokle, a live video broadcasting platform, closed a round of seed funding in April, led by Tech Coast Angels, Sierra Angels, and a Grammy-nominated singer. As we wrote in April, the startup allows anyone to live stream video content, broadcasting it to a virtual room of viewers — townhall-style. But unlike Ustream or GoToMeeting, Vokle’s value proposition is that the broadcaster can take live text and video questions from the audience, so that those watching have an opportunity to actually shape the direction and arc of the content. Vokle itself is not a destination site, each broadcast is embeddable and intended to be added to users’ blogs, websites, and so on. The user-facing interface offers a fairly straightforward video chat layout, where those watching the broadcast can submit realtime feedback and interact with a simple chat feature, while the broadcaster is able to take advantage of various curation and editing tools. The creator can also assign roles to assist in moderating the event, including video screeners and remote co-hosts. It’s a nifty little platform, great for creating branded events, and I see it being very useful in auditions, political town hall meetings, conferences, etc., but it’s been some missing essential features. Now, it seems, Vokle is finally closing the gap, having announced that its users will now have access to video recordings of every event created on the platform (going forward). Ten to twenty minutes after each event has concluded, the video recording will automatically be updated to appear to users’ event and series pages on Vokle, or to the location of a user’s embedded video.  What’s more, recordings allow viewers to skip ahead to specific questions (called “chapters”) asked during the live event, making the viewing of the recorded video more akin to watching a DVD than VHS. Vokle automatically turns each question taken by the host, whether text or video, into a mark on the video timeline (which is seen as a small circle) below the video. Not unlike SoundCloud’s embedded comments in its waveform layout. So, as a users click to a new video, users can view the series, the topic of the video at hand, and are now able to scroll through what is essentially a table of contents to view the “chapters” or “questions” that are most interesting to the viewer.  With one click, viewers hover over that circle, at which point they will be given the option to blast out a link to a specific question via Facebook or Twitter that will link to a specific segment in the recording. So, if a user embeds a live event onto their site, once the event is over, that embed code will automatically update later with all the chapters and sharing features, and every live broadcast is automatically turned into a recording, so this isn’t a feature users need to request as needed. Vokle has a lot of growing left to do, and it needs to make sure that it’s building a viable business rather than something that’s just a snazzy set of video features. It’s added a couple of integral enhancements to its overall product, and has a lot of potential, but there are still miles to go, especially considering that Google can simply add “Hangouts”, its cloud-based video-conferencing platform that’s part of Google+, and the tech industry will reflexively declare it the winner in group video.  So, there’s more to go, but Vokle — being ad-free and containing live chat, the ability to add video and text questions in realtime, a mobile app, and polling — is off to a pretty good start. For more on Vokle’s new features, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Marketing communications and market research group Aegis Media has pumped $11 million into ‘personal media’ technology solutions provider TigerSpike in exchange for a minority stake.  TigerSpike’s solutions aim to enable its clients to form closer relationships with their content users through mobile applications and websites and social media. The company markets a cloud-based service delivery platform dubbed Phoenix that enables customers like Pepsi, News Corp, Vodafone, The Daily Telegraph, the WWF and The Economist to deploy content and services across a broad range of personal media devices, from mobile phones to tablets, portable and home gaming consoles, and eBook readers.   TigerSpike was founded in Australia in 2003. The investment by Aegis will enable the company to expand into the Asia-Pacific market, beginning with its newly-opened Singapore office, and to bolster its product development efforts. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A PR rep tells us Groupon and LivingSocial challenger BuyWithMe has acquired Edhance, which operates one of the largest student rewards program in the United States. Terms of the deal, which will be announced some time this morning, were not disclosed. Update: the press release has hit the wire. The news comes on the heels of our report on Groupon buying Zappedy, which also helps merchants to better understand and retain customers, using data gathered from a mixture of direct feeds and credit card aggregators. The acquisition of Edhance will enable daily deals provider BuyWithMe to allow merchants to track customer return rates and ROI from daily deals and longer-term offers, as they can set up customized reward and loyalty offers linked to customers’ debit or credit cards. Edhance, founded in 2007, is headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts adjacent to the MIT campus. Amusingly, the company prominently features BuyWithMe rival Groupon on its website. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Adobe this morning announced that it has acquired EchoSign, a provider of electronic signature solutions and signature automation.  Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but the founders as well as all full-time employees of EchoSign, which has offices in Palo Alto, California, the UK and Germany, will join Adobe. EchoSign’s solution, which is said to currently support more than three million users worldwide, will be offered as part of Adobe’s online document exchange services platform and be integrated with Adobe’s SendNow for managed file transfer, FormsCentral for form creation and CreatePDF for online PDF creation.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily An anonymous tipster tells us Zappedy, a company that offered various technology products for local businesses, has been acquired by Groupon, information that turns out to be correct according to a message posted on the former’s website (which, sadly, hasn’t been archived by the Wayback Machine). There’s isn’t much information about Zappedy on the Web altogether, but here’s what I’ve been scraping together thanks to my phenomenal Web searching skills: Zappedy was founded in early 2010 and was backed by Innovation Endeavors, the investment firm founded by former Google CEO Eric Schmidt. According to its AngelList profile, Zappedy was funded by IE’s Dror Berman and Corey Ford, specifically. Bling Nation co-CEO and founding partner of investment firm MECK Wences(lao) Casares also turns up. And according to their LinkedIn profiles, Innovation Endeavors’ (and TokBox founder) Ron Hose and Project Slice co-founder Harpinder Singh Madan were also advising Zappedy. Update: we’re told that Dror Berman and Ron Hose were actually the ones backing Zappedy. This is how the startup is described on the Innovation Endeavors website: Zappedy powers revolutionary applications that help brick and mortar merchants better understand, attract and retain customers.  Using data gathered from a mixture of direct feeds and credit card aggregators, Zappedy enables next-generation commerce, entertainment and mobile advertising applications that recognize customers’ offline purchases as well as their online activities. Notably, it looks like Zappedy is associated with Startup Chile, a program of the Chilean Government to attract early stage entrepreneurs and sway them into starting their businesses in Chile. You can find a short interview with Zappedy co-founder Na’ama Moran here (also embedded below). From what I can gather, Zappedy basically enabled small local businesses to easily create a website and advertise online through social media and daily deal websites simply by sending emails. Groupon likely acquired the company for its team but possibly also for the technology (to be able to offer more tools for merchants who don’t have a strong online presence yet). Update 2: we’re told by someone in the know that the above was Zappedy’s previous offering, and that they’ve since pivoted to ‘something else’, presumably closer to the service as described on the Innovation Endeavors website. Hence, the video below is no longer relevant to Zappedy’s most recent product proposition, and apparently Moran was wrongly described as a Zappedy co-founder. Zappedy was co-founded by Francisco Larrain, Evan Macmillan, Daniel Pérez Rada and Ricardo Zilleruelo-Ramos (at least according to their respective LinkedIn profiles). Another interesting name that turns up when perusing LinkedIn is Brad Griffith, a former business developer at LOLapps and, before that, a senior financial analyst at Google. I’ve contacted Groupon, Zappedy and Innovation Endeavors, but since it’s weekend and not exactly the perfect time to reach people, I don’t expect to get more information rapidly. For a list of acquisitions by Groupon, check their CrunchBase profile (left sidebar). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editors Note: Guest contributor Semil Shah is an entrepreneur interested in digital media, consumer Internet, and social networks. He is based in Palo Alto and you can follow him on Twitter @semilshah. One of the most prolific vinyl collections belongs to a DJ who only surfaces every now and then. And when he does, legions of fans wait on baited breath, desperate to taste the latest brew from Josh Davis, otherwise known as DJ Shadow. DJs like Shadow usually begin creating underground.  Their music is the result of months of sampling and cutting to form entirely new sounds. These new tunes form in darkness, outside the purview of record labels, radio stations, and the majority of listeners. It’s a bit romanticized, but there’s also much truth to the underground creative process and secretive DJ battles that occur in real life, where other DJs rate their peers. For those who have witnessed a live battle, it’s a unique environment where an unknown DJ can conceivably, on any given night, spin records better than pros like DJ Shadow. Yes, this is another post about Turntable.fm. TechCrunch’s Erick Schonfeld was the first to write about the service back in May. Since then, it’s taken off like a hot summer single.  Nearly everyone believes Turntable could become a big deal, though it faces dangerous landmines (see below) and may struggle to stay in the limelight now that Spotify has launched in the U.S. There’s a great story about the company’s pivot and creation of the service. Investors have circled around Manhattan, and the company’s Series B should be announced soon. Every tech blog and Quora have covered its rise numerous times, it’s technology stack, how it could make money, how to create playlists, a live DJ event in NYC, and even mainstream pubs like The New York Times weighed in. I won’t regurgitate or summarize any of the coverage thus far, but many of these pieces miss the key points about why this site has so much promise. I’d like to shine some light on these. First, the Turntable.fm platform could help level the playing field for aspiring DJs and musicians to build their reputation, their audience, and perhaps even get discovered. In the real world, DJs create tracks and battle underground, earning their reputation by performing in various venues, trading mix tapes, referencing (or dissing) their peers, and incorporating new tricks into their cuts. What has been happening underground for years may now slowly be coming online, where someone could moonlight as a DJ and, perhaps even be discovered by a club or promoter. Second, even folks who love Turntable remain skeptical about its prospects in a music world that contains Pandora, iTunes, Rdio, and now Spotify, which will feature some integration with Facebook. I believe there will be room for all of these services and that they each satisfy different needs. In other words, Turntable won’t “kill” Pandora  nor be “killed” by Spotify, which may not “kill” Rdio. Pandora is about letting machines learn your music tastes and help you discover new tunes. Recently, it announced its own social layer. iTunes wasn’t able to break into social with Ping, though a young startup Rexly is trying to crack the code. Spotify, which launched this week and may integrate with Facebook, could offer more choices than iTunes for less money and theoretically could recreate the “social rooms” ambiance of Turntable. All of these services carry a large song inventory, largely composed of mainstream music, both current and extensive back catalogs. Not everyone’s tastes are mainstream and/or homogenous, however. For some, buying music on iTunes is simply boring, chock full of pop hits and TV soundtracks. A service like Turntable allows users to organize themselves by type of music, geography, work groups, and so forth, and helps unlock niche areas of music that make up an interesting long tail in discovery. Third, there’s widespread fear of record labels and licensing fees. The labels could conspire to kill this service, and their track record isn’t pretty. Or, Turntable could die under the weight of onerous licensing fees. On the other hand, the record companies are so beaten up that they may have actually reached a point where may want a service like Turntable to succeed, so that it cannot burn bridges to future distribution channels, especially now given the promise around Spotify. While I wouldn’t underestimate the battle scars inflicted on the likes of Napster or Grooveshark, it seems the tide continues to move in favor of the consumer, and that the timing for Turntable could actually be impeccable. Finally, the most exciting future possibility for Turntable is mobile and crowd interaction. Right now, there isn’t a mobile application, and given the user load issues the site is experiencing, it may be a while before they build this. For now and the foreseeable future, Turntable’s music will be heard through laptops and desktops, where a small few could create new content, and some others could help spread it through voting, and help it reach the remaining mass of listeners. Imagine being at a club during a DJ battle where audience members could register their votes via mobile apps or SMS, in addition to their applause? Or, maybe you’ll want a certain crew of DJs to play at your birthday party in San Francisco, but they’re located in Berlin—a service like Turntable could help bridge that gap, and offer your guests a chance to chime in on the music selection. All of these possibilities surround audio files, but is there room for video, too? I recognize it’s early days for the Turntable.fm team. I don’t mean to suggest that overcoming any of these hurdles will be easy. In fact, it will be extremely interesting to see who joins as an investor in the Series B round, because an endeavor like this will require both entrepreneurs and investors taking the fight to the record industry, or creating incentives for them to play along nicely.  In some ways, it reminds me of Quora with its up-votes, entering “rooms” instead of following “threads,” and could also follow the 1-9-90 rule of content generation—where 1% create new music on the site, 9% help spread it by voting and sharing, and the rest of us consume it. Among most music fans I run into who have tried Turntable, there’s this initial, almost indescribable fascination with the service and shared desire to see it to succeed despite any challenges. They have cultivated a great deal of good will. There are other real threats to the service. Will DJs and even casual listeners experience fatigue of waiting too long to DJ or hanging out in empty rooms? Will the technology stack hold up to the incredible demand for the service, especially when a celebrity DJ wants to spin for his or her fans? Or will the site succumb to trolls, invasive brand accounts, or SPAM? Is the site really about discovering music, or just chatting about music, or both? Or is this entire package seen as a possible antidote to Spotify’s upcoming Facebook plans, where Turntable could be gobbled up as a strategic acquisition, especially for artists and record labels who may be uneasy abowithut Facebook’s growing footprint in media? Turntable.fm has the makings of a huge hit, already attracting world renown DJs like Questlove and Diplo. Perhaps even DJ Shadow will give the site a whirl before he releases his new album later this fall. For someone like Shadow, selling out shows worldwide isn’t a problem. Reaching new fans is, however. And, there may just be that part of him which misses the old days of DJ battles, something his status now rarely affords him. A site like Turntable.fm could give him and a variety of other established or hopeful artists an entirely new platform to test new beats, find others to collaborate with, test geographic demand for new music, interact with fans, sell albums and merchandise, play special shows online, and so much more. The possibilities are endless. That is the promise of Turntable.fm—and here’s to hoping it all gets realized one day. Just turned off turntable to play with Spotify. — Eric Wiesen (@ewiesen) July 14, 2011  Image credit: David Torcivia Latest headlines delivered to you daily Group buying is moving into the commercial clean energy space thanks to Solar@Work, a program designed by San Francisco’s Department of the Environment to make solar panels more affordable for business owners. Businesses have three options for acquiring solar panels through the program: Purchasing, leasing, and securing a loan. A federal grant covering 30% of installation costs is also on offer. Solar@Work hopes to sign on at least 20 building owners in the San Francisco area by the end of the year, which could translate to as much as 2 megawatts of solar power. While the program is innovative in simplifying solar for commercial buildings, it is not the first to harness group buying power for solar. 1Bog has a similar model for home-based solar installations, and SolarMosaic provides a crowdfunding platform for bringing solar to community buildings such as schools and churches. The group buying model could discount the panels by 10-15% and reduce the cost of administrative fees by as much as 75%. That doesn’t sound like a steal by consumer group buying standards, but given the price tag on solar panels, it could add up to significant savings. The city says the high upfront cost of solar is the main barrier to entry into solar for most commercial property owners. San Mateo’s SolarCity won the bid to provide the panels, and participating businesses are expected to pay less for solar than what they pay for power from the grid. Currently, commercial buildings fewer than four stories are eligible to participate in the program. If the pilot is successful, it could be expanded to other parts of the country, or even globally. Photo by Living Off Grid Latest headlines delivered to you daily Attention spans are short these days, and some might even say the Web isn’t helping this phenomenon. Regardless, time is money, and people are ever-looking for more useful ways to maximize what time they have. Many have little tolerance (or time) for long-form digital content, and we’re seeing the proliferation of the “tl;dr” (too long; didn’t read) mentality as it sweeps the Internet nation. And, for those addicted to Twitter, content that comes in 140 character chunks is the norm, if not the preferred way, to express something shorthand. (Other than emoticons, of course.) Enter the Trimit time-saver. Trimit is a 0.99-cent app for iOS that allows you to condense content into 1,000, 500, or 140-character summaries. Essentially, Trimit is a text auto summarizer designed to fit all those things you’re reading on a mobile device into concise synopses and share those over SMS, email, Facebook, Twitter in .txt form — all with a few clicks. And this is pretty nifty feature: Trimit can summarize your text just by shaking your device — like the opposite of mobile Boggle. No longer will your friends have to scan through your wordy Facebook status updates about your cats; just shake your phone to condense all those emotions into 140 characters. Apparently Apple likes the idea, too, as it just featured Trimit in the app store and mentioned it on Twitter. Today, Trimit gave TechCrunch a little piece of exclusive news, announcing a bookmarklet for the Web, (which is currently in beta and will be available for download within the week) so that you can get all the benefits of the app on your browser, too. For both web and mobile, text can be directly imported from any URL right from within the app using Trimit’s HTML parsing secret sauce.  The bookmarklet has many of the same sharing features as mobile, including Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, as well as URL sharing with a shorter summary to Delicious, Digg, Stumbleupon, Reddit, and more. You can print and save as a .txt file, sync with your computer, and import files from other devices to get at that summarizin’. Trimit Founder Nick D’Aloisio, a 15-year-old Australian transplanted to London, said that he, like me, can sometimes be a bit of a waffler, which is where the inspiration for Trimit comes from. And now, through his team’s app and bookmarklet, he’s bringing pithiness to articles and blogs, to email, text, and Tweet composition, and to the transferral of desktop documents to mobile. (Trimit would have been a huge help for those poor souls who had to read my thesis in college.) In the spirit of text summarizing, I should cut it off here. But readers may be curious as to how the auto summary works, and to that end, whether it works well or not. D’Aloisio was willing to share some of the juice behind the app, so here’s a peek. If you’re a words dork like myself, you may just like this. The algorithm uses a process of “extraction” to create a summary of the text to one of the three specified lengths. Without completely revealing the secret sauce, the algorithm scans the text using a precise keyword search to find prominent topics within its content. It disregards general words and fillers, like articles and linking words (“but”, “and”, “when”) and gives words and phrases that are signals of importance, like time and/or place adverbials (the where’s and when’s, like “in California”, for example) greater weight.  Trimit also uses what is called “verb stemming”, which allow particular verbs in different conjugations to still be counted by the algorithm, like “speak” versus “spoke”, for example. This makes sure that past conjugations stay that way and don’t somehow pop into the future tense. The algorithm counts the occurrence of key phrases as well, taking into account the position of those phrases in the passage, so that they remain in order when summarizing. And though linking words are often dismissed, contradictory conjunctions like “however” are given more weight because they often are included in overviews, just as facts, figures and quotes are valued higher as well. As you may have guessed, it all works on a points-based ranking system, and the words and phrases that are ranked highest, show up in the summary. I’ll leave it at that, but you can learn more about Trimit in the video below. The Trimit team is currently in the process of raising a seed round.  Oh, and just for good measure, for those who are curious, here is Trimit’s autosummary of this post: “Trimit Founder Nick D’Aloisio, a 15-year-old Australian transplanted to London, said that he, like me, can sometimes be a bit of a waffler, which is where the inspiration for Trimit comes from.  Trimit can summarize your text just by shaking your device — like the opposite of mobile Boggle. Today, Trimit gave TechCrunch a little piece of exclusive news, announcing a bookmarklet for the Web, (which is currently in beta and will be available for download within the week) so that you can get all the benefits of the app on your browser, too. The Trimit team is currently in the process of raising a seed round.” Not too shabby. Latest headlines delivered to you daily With valuations for tech companies going through the roof from Facebook on down to Dropbox, the endless bubble debate sees no end.  Paul Kedrosky and Vivek Wadhwa recently got into it on Bloomberg West TV. Professor Wadhwa thinks it will all end badly with Grandma losing her piggy bank.  Kedrosky points out that bubbles usually occur at the tail end of a market run-up, and he predicts we have at least a good 4 to 5 years left for this one. He compares Wadhwa to a central banker trying to take the punch away at a party before the party even begins. Wadhwa sticks to his guns and that “when this little bubble around social media bursts” it will take down all tech valuations. It’s a spirited debate.  Watch the video and tell us who you think is right in comments. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social gaming company CrowdStar is teaming up with the incubator which it was spawned from, YouWeb, to launch a $10 million venture fund, called the StarFund. The fund will make investments in promising mobile game developers. Game developers can apply to receive up to $250,000 in initial funding to develop their mobile games, if they are selected as part of StarFund. CrowdStar, which just raised $23 million in new funding, will also offer marketing, international distribution, and analytics resources to teams those games show promise. Interestingly, CrowdStar CEO Peter Relan (who also launched YouWeb) tells us that the fund is also meant to be a way of acquiring talent. Relan explains that while Zynga makes outright acquisitions for talent, CrowdStar is taking a slightly different approach to attracting game development talent by funding fledgling game developers. Relan also said that the investments may not necessarily be equity-based, and will be distributed and structured based on the needs of the developer. The fund is focused on mobile, because this has been a particularly important strategic opportunity for CrowdStar. The company is looking to expand to additional markets through mobile games and recently launched its first mobile-only game Top Girl. Other YouWeb incubated companies have implemented a similar model and seen success. Mobile social gaming platform OpenFeint (which was incubated within YouWeb, spun off and then acquired by GREE) partnered with Chinese gaming company The9 to fund game developers building off of the OpenFeint Android platform. Since that launch in March, the partnership has produced and helped fund the development of 50 games in 30 app stores. And other gaming companies are launching independent funds as well. Mobile gaming company TinyCo just launched a new $5 million investment fund, called the TinyFund, to help support mobile game developers. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Editor’s note: Rocky Agrawal continues his in-depth guest series looking at the daily deal industry. Agrawal is an entrepreneur who has worked on local products since 1995. He blogs at reDesign and Tweets @rakeshlobster. Groupon is currently in a quiet period in relation with its planned IPO. Groupon’s amended S-1 IPO filing is out. The revised filing tamps down some of the enthusiastic tone of the original and highlights a number of risks, several of which were covered in TechCrunch’s in-depth series on daily deals. Potential investors looking for good news will be disappointed—I didn’t see anything in the document that would lead me to believe the business is any better than I’ve written before. Among the highlights: Controversial accounting metric de-emphasized. Groupon’s filings use a non-standard metric called Adjusted Consolidated Segment Operating Income. To arrive at this, Groupon takes the revenue generated by a deal and subtracts only the money paid to the merchant. Significant costs like subscriber acquisition, marketing and sales are ignored. I describe it as “the best possible way to view our business if you took out all of the things that make it look terrible.” The revised S-1 walks back its importance. “We believe Adjusted CSOI is an important measure of the performance of our business” has been revised to “We believe Adjusted CSOI is an important measure for management to evaluate the performance of our business.” Later, it says, “We do not view Adjusted CSOI as a valuation metric.” Gift card laws and compliance. In the revised S-1, Groupon states “Groupons generally are included within the definition of “gift cards” in many of these laws,” an issue I reported on previously. Groupon updates the risk section to include the possibility that Groupon or merchants may in some states be on the hook for the full value (including promotional discount) of the Groupon for years or indefinitely. Unlike retailers who issue gift cards, Groupon does not record Groupon issuance as a liability. (Technically, Groupon considers itself a marketing agent and the Groupon is really issued by the merchant.) This presents a significant risk for investors. Further, many merchants use Groupons as an introductory promotion to build a book of business; if they become aware that they may be on the hook for Groupons indefinitely, there is an increased likelihood that they won’t issue Groupons. “In addition, we have received inquiries from the attorneys general of various states regarding the operation of our business under state laws.” Connecticut’s attorney general is among them. Calling out impact of international growth. Much of Groupon’s revenue growth has been the result of international expansion, not organic growth in existing markets. “The increase in our revenue, key operating metrics and employee headcount from 2009 to 2010 is partially attributable to these acquisitions and the subsequent growth of our International segment as a result of such acquisitions.” International growth is also very important to Groupon for cash flow. In the U.S. and Canada, Groupon pays businesses within 60 days of the Groupon run. Elsewhere, merchants are paid as Groupons are redeemed. As a result, Groupon can hold on to that cash much longer. Groupons gross margins are higher internationally and Groupon also benefits from unredeemed Groupons. (In the U.S. and Canada, the merchant benefits.) National deals. Groupon specifically acknowledges that national deals are offered at lower margins. “Gross profit is influenced by the mix of national and local deals we offer. We tend to accept lower gross profit margins for national deals because such offers are made, in part, for the purpose of acquiring new subscribers and establishing our brand.” Deal mix. The revised S-1 shows the deal types split between North America and International and the results are very different. For example, food and drink was 29% of deals in North America and 19% internationally. Retail was 16% in North America and 4% internationally. The data are reported in an opaque way making deeper analysis difficult. But food and drink and retail are the toughest categories for merchants to make profitable using Groupons. But they’re also the categories that sell the best. No longer “wildy profitable”. Groupon says that a Bloomberg report that Groupon co-founder and Executive Chairman Lefkofsky said  “Groupon was going to be wildly profitable” does not “accurately or completely” reflect his views. (Bloomberg stands by its story.) Employees. In less than 45 days, the company has grown from “over 7,000 employees” to “over 9,000 employees”. General softening. Several sentences were added softening the S-1. “We had net income of $21,000 for the second quarter of 2009 as compared to a net loss of $102.7 million for the first quarter of 2011. ” The data was already in the S-1 before, it has just been made more obvious. Another addition: “As a result of our limited operating history in a new industry and because the majority of our subscribers registered for our service or made their initial purchase of a Groupon in the past 12 months, it is difficult to discern meaningful or established trends with respect to the purchase activity of our subscribers or customers. ” A letter from Andrew Mason has been moved from the front of the S-1 to page 32 and now says, “As with any business in a 30-month-old industry, success for our investors is not guaranteed. We have yet to reach sustained profitability and we have no shortage of competition. Our path will include some moments of brilliance and others of sheer stupidity.” A whole lot of beans to count. Starbucks chief Howard Schultz will make $200,000 a year and get 60,000 stock options for serving on Groupon’s board. Despite all of these changes, the S-1 doesn’t address the things I most want to know. There are a number of key metrics that should be known to the company that I’d want insight on before investing: Email subscriptions and open rates. What is the trend in email open rates? Are emails being opened more or less frequently? A decline in email open rates would indicate deal fatigue on the part of consumers or a decline in deal quality for consumers. The rapid growth in subscriptions can also hide the people who have dropped out. What is the unsubscription rate? Companies like Netflix report churn and it would be useful to have the data here. Fraud and refund rates. The S-1 makes scant references to fraud and refunds, though it does show reserves of about 4% of revenue for refunds. Given their generous refund policies and a strong focus on small businesses, this can present a significant risk to investors. Small businesses are subject to failure and Groupon’s expensive merchant terms result in a big risk of adverse selection. To date, Groupon has refunded money to consumers who have had difficulty redeeming vouchers. What proportion of their subscription list was “bought” and hasn’t returned. Just like small businesses who use Groupons to draw customers in with amazing prices, daily deal providers occasionally subsidize deals for customer acquisition. Deals for things like Amazon gift cards and movie tickets are often subsidized by the deal providers. This can work as long as those customers continue to purchase. But if they don’t make further purchases, it’s just a loss. Those deals are also expensive because it’s virtually guaranteed that existing customers will buy them. Subscriber and customer acquisition costs and their trends. These are critical metrics to understand whether Groupon can be profitable in the long term. If customers can’t be acquired for less than their value, that’s a problem. I would expect that these costs go up over time as the low-hanging fruit has already been picked. The S-1 mentions that high acquisition costs are a concern but doesn’t directly provide them.  Doing the math based on other numbers provided, I estimate the cost of a list subscriber at $6.40 and the cost of an actual purchaser at $26.50. That’s a big number for a business with few barriers to entry. For Netflix, this number is $18.03—but Netflix has a subscription business with recurring revenue. Revenue by deal type. Groupon runs deals across a wide range of categories. For some businesses, the underlying economics work. For others, they don’t work. If most of the revenue is coming from restaurant deals, that would raise serious red flags. If revenue is predominantly from events, that’s a good sign. (Some of this can be estimated from external sources, but it would be good to have validated data.) The revised S-1 has charts that shows breakdown of types, but it doesn’t provide revenue. Voucher redemption rates. These are going to be imperfect due to poor tracking technology. But for businesses that are doing online tracking, it would be useful to have the data. It could be used to estimate any potential risk if states hold Groupon responsible for compliance with gift card laws. Proportion of deals purchased by high volume customers. Groupon is selling businesses on the value proposition of customer acquisition—that all they have to do is show off how great they are and customers will come back. But if deals are primarily purchased by deal seekers, it may not really be in the business’ control whether they come back. Over time, businesses would stop running Groupons if they knew that they had no shot at converting a customer. Cheapskates are not good acquisition targets for most businesses. (Except for Groupon and its many clones.) A statement on risk management practices. In North America, Groupon is essentially in the factoring business. Credit risk management is important to being successful. Take on too much credit risk and the company could face a lot of problems. As far as I have been able to determine, the daily deal companies are not sufficiently vetting credit risk. Split between national/regional and local deals. National merchants will likely provide a lower share of revenue to Groupon than local merchants and will generally be more sophisticated about the structure of the offer. A higher portion of national merchants will results in margin compression (the amended S-1 notes that national deals do indeed have lower margins). The trend line on this split is also important. My observations indicate that deals are trending more national. Of course, no company will provide all of these things. But an informed investor might want to ask these questions before buying the stock or projecting Groupon’s current growth forward indefinitely. Share your experience with Groupon, LivingSocial and others. Email dailydeals@agrawals.org. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you talk to Yelp CEO Jeremy Stoppelman, he always likes to point out how many reviews there are on Yelp. It’s a point of pride and competitive differentiation. Even Google Places, which borrows liberally from Yelp reviews, seems to think so. Today, Yelp crossed 20 million reviews, up from 10 million in March, 2010 (and 17 million last April). The reviews bring in the visitors, and visitor growth tracks pretty closely with the growth in reviews. Yelp hit 53 million visitors in June, according to its own stats. It took about 6 years for Yelp to get to 20 million reviews. Yelp was founded in 2004, and it took two and a half years to get to its first million reviews (in May, 2007). Then it took roughly another three years to get to 10 million (March, 2010), and then added this last 10 million in a year and a quarter. Yelp focusses so much on reviews, and trying to get quality user reviews, because everything else can be replicated. With so many places databases popping up, creating a directory of local businesses is easier than ever, but Yelp has always been about the user reviews as a sorting mechanism to find the best places nearby. Stoppelman is so protective of Yelp’s reviews that he still won’t allow mobile users to upload reviews from their phones because he wants them to be well thought-out. (You can add tips, however, from mobile). They also tend to be lengthier than what you’d get from mobile reviews. At 2.2 billion words overall, that comes to an average of 110 words per review. If he loosened up on that restriction, Yelp could have 50 million reviews in no time.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily SupportSpace, which helps companies provide remote technical support with a range of customer service solutions and a network of ‘experts’, has raised $12 million in funding from Gemini, BRM and Emergence Capital. The round brings the startup’s total funding raised to nearly $37 million. Founded in 2006 by Doron Elgressy (president) and Yair Grindlinger (CEO), SupportSpace enables companies like software/hardware vendors and retailers to offer remote tech support services to consumers through a so-called ‘Virtual Expert Network’ which empowers independent experts to provide tech support services to consumers on a range of connected devices, on their own terms. SupportSpace supports thousands of customers on a daily basis and claims to deliver over 5 million minutes of service per month. The company currently employs 75 people in the United States and Israel and claims to have revenues of “tens of millions of dollars”. One of the companies they have partnered with is retail giant Best Buy, in an effort to boost the remote tech services business of GeekSquad (a subsidiary of Best Buy), enabling customers to purchase remote tech service products and service plans online or at BestBuy’s 1,100+ stores. Other customers include Panda Security, Check Point Software and Lavasoft. (Via The Marker – in Hebrew) Latest headlines delivered to you daily When BillGuard presented their innovative service at TechCrunch Disrupt earlier this year, the startup received fairly positive feedback from the panel of judges, which included well-known investor Fred Wilson. For background, BillGuard alerts users of unwanted charges such as hidden fees, billing errors, scams and fraud on credit card bills. The startup essentially crowdsources scams by alerting you when a charge on your bill is flagged by anyone else using BillGuard or posting scams on online forums. The startup will also take into account its own analysis and monitors the web for any complaints about credit card scams. At the time of TechCrunch Disrupt in May, BillGuard had a freemium model, which charged users for extra services and additional credit cards to monitor (one card was free with the service). During the finalist panel, Wilson suggested that to reduce the friction of use, BillGuard could charge users based on how much the service saved users in terms of fees, as opposed to charging users for additional features and cards. BillGuard’s CEO Yaron says that they took Wilson’s feedback seriously and considered this model, but eventually decided that operationally charging based on fees served didn’t make sense for the startup’s model. As he wrote in this Quora discussion, “When you build a system that inherently gets better at scale, you need to remove all friction to scale. To be clear, BillGuard’s multi-billion dollar opportunity is in the backend with banks and merchants (and always has been), and if that revenue takes off faster than expected (its looking good) we may never deploy our freemium model and simply give all consumer service levels away for free. I would love to do that but we reserve the right with a 1 week old beta to take our time making the right decision for our users and our company.” Now BillGuard is completely free (the company took Wilson’s advice to reduce friction) for an unlimited amount of credit cards and Yaron tells us that the company is seeing considerable traction in partnering for distribution deals with banks and financial institutions as a long-term business model. And he adds that this model will be deployed sooner than the startup expected. BillGuard has actually saved its beta testers over $200,000 in refundable bad charges found in only the first month and the service found unwanted and unauthorized charges on 20% of its beta tester’s cards. BillGuard has raised $3 million in angel funding fro  Bessemer Venture Partners, Chris Dixon, Ron Conway, IA Ventures, Howard Lindzon and Yaron Galai. Here’s BillGuard’s initial demo at TechCrunch Disrupt.FacebookLinkedInBillGuard Startup Battlefield PresentationLatest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – What is the deal with all these small Belgian startups suddenly developing severe international ambitions? Yesterday it was Wondergraphs, today it’s Getyoo, a provider of NFC interactive solutions for the events and meetings industry. The fledgling company has raised €600,000 (which is roughly $850,000) from Eric Bigeard, ex-CEO of Lyreco, a European leader in the B2B distribution of office supplies with current sales surpassing 2 billion euros. Getyoo believes the event industry will change radically thanks to the possibility of near-field communication (NFC), technology that enables simplified transactions such as data exchange (a digital business card a list of contacts, photos, applications, money, virtual items and so on). Getyou co-founder and CEO Alexis Tinel tells me its first product, a small physical device called the Clickey that can be compared with the Poken, is currently distributed throughout Europe, and that the company has now launched a brand new NFC interactive card that allows people at events – think business conferences and summits but also live music concerts and whatnot – to interact with social networks such as Facebook, LinkedIn and Twitter. Another European startup called Cardcloud is also doing interesting things in this space. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Soon Facebook will be expanding its Chat product with video calling functionality, powered by Skype. It won’t support group video calling, though, at least not at first, and we haven’t heard anything about support on mobile phones so far. Next week, Tinychat will submit a group video chat application that will work on both iOS devices and desktop browsers, and supports video chat sessions of up to 12 people at the same time. The promotion video below shows what the app will look like, but it’s the fact that it support video calls from the desktop as well as iPhone, iPod touch and iPad devices that sets it apart from similar applications from fring and Tango (and Google+ Hangouts). I’m not a big fan of group video calling myself, but I realize that lots of people engage in that kind of activity on regular basis around the world. All you need to do it from your iOS (and soon Android) devices or your desktop via Tinychat is to have a Facebook account, which, you know, more than 750 million people do. In short, I think this app will be a hit. I talked to Tinychat co-founder Dan Blake, and he told me that the Tinychat web service is handling over 25 million visits a month, with close to 100,000 new users signing up on a daily basis. Already, Blake says, Tinychat processes more than a billion minutes of video calls per month, and revenue is starting to flow in. The company recently raised $1.5 million in funding from Sean ‘Diddy’ Combs, angel investorNaval Ravikant and A-Grade, the investment vehicle of Madonna manager Guy Oseary, actor Ashton Kutcher and billionaire Ron Burkle. We’ll update when the app goes live. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The cofounder of Google Voice is back for more. And he’s hungry. Back in May we reported on Firespotter Labs, a new incubator started by GrandCentral cofounder and CEO Craig Walker (GrandCentral was acquired by Google in 2007 and relaunched as Google Voice in 2009). Walker left the Google Voice team in late 2010, did a stint as an Entrepreneur in Residence at Google Ventures, and laid the kindling for Firespotter — which included closing a $3 million funding round led by Google Ventures. And now, just a few months after it closed that funding, Firespotter is launching its first application: an application called Nosh, which makes it easy to share snapshots of the food you’re eating with your friends (it does some more useful things too, so read on). It’s equal parts Instagram, Yelp, and Foursquare, with a few unique dashes of its own. The app has just gone live for both iPhone and Android — and there’s also a slick web version too. The basic premise behind Nosh is that people like to share what they’re eating with their friends (just look at your Instagram or Twitter feeds). And they also like to know what they should eat when they’re at a restaurant. Nosh makes it easy to do both. When you first launch the app, you’ll be prompted to connect with your Facebook and Twitter logins, so that you can quickly build up a list of friends who are also Nosh’ing. From there, you’ll have a few options. The most important one is the ‘Nosh’ — the service’s equivalent of a check-in. The idea is that you go to a restaurant, take a photo of what you ordered, and leave a quick review and/or remark about it. The app includes the standard ‘nearby venue’ listing, to help making finding the restaurant a snappy process. Another important feature is the Feed. This is a lot like what you’d find in Instagram, Path, and other photo sharing apps: tap it, and you’ll see a stream of photos your friends have recently taken of their own meals, along with their own reviews and comments about their meal. But Nosh isn’t just setting out to help you share and view photos of food — it’s actually useful. The company currently has a team in India ingesting thousands of  menus from restaurants across the United States (they’re using some technology built in-house to do this quickly, so it isn’t just manual entry). The idea is that when you go to check into a venue, you’ll also be able to see which meals a restaurant offers — and they’ll include reviews left by other Nosh’ers. In other words, it’s sort of like a Yelp for individual dishes, as opposed to the restaurant itself. I’ve been trying the app out for a couple of days (though I don’t have many friends on it yet, obviously) and it’s well done. It looks good and is generally polished  — and once there are more meal reviews, it could be genuinely useful. My only major gripe: at this point you can’t snap photos of things you’ve cooked at home (all photos are currently associated with a venue), but this feature will be added in the next version. In the mean time, you can create a new venue called ‘Home’ if you really want to. Most of the things Nosh is doing aren’t exactly novel (Foodspotting also revolves around taking snapshots of dishes at restaurants). But it’s bundling them up nicely — and the fact that it actually has some utility (figuring out what to order at a restaurant) as opposed to just being a fun diversion could keep users coming back to the app, which is always the biggest hurdle as these services get off the ground. And while he’s excited about Nosh, Walker says that Firespotter has more in the pipeline — he hopes that once the team is running at full speed, they’ll be shipping three or four new products a year.Latest headlines delivered to you daily Music service Spotify has finally arrived in the U.S. In case you haven’t heard, Spotify has made its free version invite-only, but you can access the music service now if you shell out $4.99 or $9.99 per month. If you don’t want to pay for Spotify, and don’t have an invite in your inbox, don’t worry. There’s always Klout Perks. Klout, the startup that measures influence on Twitter, LinkedIn and Facebook, has a limited number of free Spotify account invitations to pass out via its Klout Perks. Klout Perks are exclusive offers or experiences, given as a result of your Klout. Klout CEO Joe Fernandez says that Klout has partnered with Spotify to offer free invites to those Klout users who have hight scores in topics relevant to music/entertainment. We don’t know the exact number of invites, but Fernandez says Klout is working with Spotify to scale the invitations further. Apparently, if your friends end up downloading Spotify, your account might even be upgraded to Spotify Premium. This isn’t the first cool offer from Klout Perks. The initiative has offered free tickets on Virgin America, a laptop from Hewlett Packard and a weekend in a Audi A8. For Klout, it’s a way to engage brands with the platform, and connect to users. You can see if your Klout qualifies for your free invitation here. UPDATE: Many of you may have noticed that Klout is having difficult processing the massive amount of requests for invites. It appears the site is down temporarily. UPDATE II: Fernandez tells us that the response “was overwhelming and theviral spread from the influencers was even more than Spotify and us predicted.” Spotify and Klout have decided to pause the campaign until tomorrow. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It seems that it’s a big day for Swedish businesses expanding into American markets. First, vaunted music service Spotify announced it will be (at great long last) launching this morning in the U.S. And now, with albeit significantly less fanfare, Apica, the load-testing and performance-monitoring solution for cloud and mobile apps, announced that it has closed a $2 million series B round. Less glamorous than rock music, but fundmental to web and mobile operating procedures, to be sure. The round was led by Swedish venture firm Industrifonden, with participation from ALMI Invest and existing investor, KTH Chalmers Capital. The startup raised $1.3 million back in August of 2010, and has raised approximately $4.4 million to date. Each of the participating investors are Swedish firms that are duly excited about Apica’s expansion into the U.S. market, as the startup will use the round to finish its move into its new U.S. headquarters in Palo Alto. That being said, Apica will have some competition from Silicon Valley-based SOASTA, which has raised $20.7 million for its cloud-based testing solutions, as well as from Keynote Systems, a veteran of the mobile and web apps performance monitoring space. But, the Swedish company has had some success in Europe, already having attracted 250 customers including eBay Sweden, Thomas Cook EU, and PricewaterhouseCoopers. Apica is also, according to its team, in the midst of closing a deal with Newsday and recently forged strategic partnerships with Rackspace and RightScale. The startup also hopes that its newly unveiled product, Apica Watch, a cloud service that uses Selenium (a portable software testing framework for web apps), to enable users to easily measure and analyze web pages, including stylesheet, images, videos and third party calls, will make it appealing to businesses looking to optimize and test their cloud apps pre-deployment. While businesses understand the importance of web and cloud performance testing, it can be difficult for small businesses to navigate through the specifics of cloud functionality, avoiding redundancy and ensuring performance scalability, and to verify that your web app is taking full advantage of the nuances of load balancing, server caching, and all that good stuff. Apica brings the ability to load test a company’s system to mimic high traffic and system overloading from anywhere in the world, without having to run these tests in their own infrastructure. According to Apica CEO Sven Hammar, Apica’s cloud performance testing solutions have run some of the largest load tests conducted on cloud infrastructure, which the startup makes easily available to every size business and enterprise. For more, visit Apica at home. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Drchrono, a company that brings electronic health records to the iPad, has raised $675,000 in seed fundig from General Catalyst, Charles River Ventures, 500 Startups, Gmail creator and FriendFeed cofounder Paul Buchheit, Google’s Principal Engineer Matt Cutts, and the Start Fund. Y Combinator-backed drchrono simplifies the professional lives of doctors and medical professionals by bringing electronic health records and much more to the iPad. The free iPad app allows doctors to schedule patient appointments, dictate notes via audio, take pictures, write prescriptions and send them to pharmacies, enable reminders, take clinical notes, access lab results, and input electronic health records. The electronic medical records element is key because the Obama administration is currently offering strong incentives for doctors to start moving their health records online. Drchrono will help doctors start, finish and manage this process. And drchrono is more than just a simple iPad app. Doctors can upgrade to more storage for records, and complete medical billing. The billing component is another win for doctors, who spend hundreds of dollars each month for medical billing processing. Drchrono’s system integrates with all U.S. insurance companies, even the insurance agents that only use paper billing. Since launching in February, drchrono has accumulated a physician user base of over 5000 users. Co-founder Daniel Kivatinos says that this growth has been purely organic, and that doctors have simple found the app in the App Store. There’s no doubt that drchrono is entering the online medical space in an interesting time. As medical records move online, doctors are increasingly bringing laptops into the exam room to take notes, write prescriptions and more. But laptops can be cumbersome, and the iPad has emerged as a popular device for medical professionals. But not every initiative to bring medical records online has worked. For example, Google recently shuttered its online health platform Google Health. Kivatinos says that he believes that Google Health didn’t bring much innovation to the space beyond aggregation of information. Because drchrono includes distinct features like speech to text audio dictation functionality and integrations with insurance companies, the app provides value to doctors. I have several medical professionals in my family and I can attest to the fact that paper records are in the past. At the very least, drchrono gives doctors an online repository for all of the information, like notes, prescriptions, dictations, images and other data. But I believe we are going to see more and more doctors turning to the iPad and other tablet devices for use in the exam room and operating room. Drchrono is in a great position if both of these trends scale significantly in the next few years. Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s not enough for pioneering social bookmarking site Delicious to get acquired (twice). No, VHT just had to go ahead and buy Dwellicious, an oddly named service that enables people to bookmark, tag and organize real estate properties online in the same vein. The acquisition, terms of which were not disclosed, makes a lot of sense. VHT provides technology and services for marketing real estate online, and will integrate Dwellicious into its ImageWorks online marketing platform to provide brokerage clients with a tool for communicating with home buyers. Dwellicious uses social bookmarking to help home buyers share their favorite properties on Facebook, Twitter or other social media services. Buyers can organize, monitor and compare listings, make notes, add tags, and share and discuss properties with friends, family and real estate professionals. VHT ImageWorks is used by more than 100,000 real estate professionals across the United States. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – WordWatch, which provides automated pay-per-click keyword bidding solutions to small businesses, has raised $1.4 million in Series A financing in a round led by Prague‐based Credo Ventures. The startup, which boasts offices in Silicon Valley, Poland and The Netherlands, will use the funds to boost marketing and sales efforts in the US and Europe, and to expand its algorithm operations. WordWatch basically enables companies to more effectively monitor and optimize their Google AdWords campaigns, which often involve thousands of keywords, by automating the PPC bidding process. The company’s bidding engine is powered by proprietary algorithms that automatically find the best bid prices for clicks and conversions 24/7, the underlying idea being that business owners should be able to “set and forget” and focus on other things once their AdWords campaigns start. WordWatch is free to try, with subscriptions starting at $24 per month.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Yesterday, at the MobileBeat Conference in San Francisco, Google Ventures Managing Partner and Co-founder of Android Rich Miner announced that Crittercism, a startup that provides support infrastructure for mobile apps, had raised an undisclosed seed funding round from Google Ventures, Kleiner Perkins, Opus Capital, Shasta Ventures, and AOL Ventures, among others. GigaOM was the first to report on the startup’s mystery raise, but we’ve since learned from sources close to the deal what the actual amount was: $1.2 million. Our sources also indicated that those leading the charge were Ellen Pao at Kleiner Perkins, Wesley Chan at Google Ventures, Bob Borchers of Opus Capital, who was part of the original iPhone team and is former director of worldwide marketing for the iPhone, Rob Coneybeer at Shasta Ventures (who also invested in Gowalla), and Adam Smith at AOL Ventures. Early Facebook engineer Lucas Nealson also participated. While $1.2 million may not seem like a deal-size that is cause for a big fuss, considering EA’s $650 million acquisition of PopCap and Jawbone’s $70 million round yesterday, we’re hearing that the deal was pretty competitive and Crittercism had to turn investors away to make room in this round. The impressive list of investors, combined with the fact that more money and investors may have been on the table — not to mention research2guidance’s recent report that the mobile application development services market is projected to grow to $100 billion by 2015 — seem to be confirmation of the serious growth happening (and coming to) mobile app development, and the potential of startups like Crittercism that provide support systems for these app developers. For this, his second startup, Co-founder and CEO Andrew Levy joined the AngelPad accelerator program, raising this round shortly after the incubator’s demo day in March. As to Crittercism itself, the startup has built a platform that enables developers to diagnose mobile app crashes and to easily provide customer support to an app’s users. Crittercism’s iOS library (previously in beta) was yesterday made available to all mobile app developers and has also made its Android SDK available for limited release. While most of the growth in the mobile apps space has been among startups offering tools for speedy or custom development, there is ample room for those providing customer support and services that help developers diagnose and solve mobile app crashes and outages. Troubleshooting errors and customer support is an extremely important part of customer satisfaction and engagement, but it also eats up time and resources for developers. The startup’s solution, then, provides businesses with a library that can be added to any app and connects to a SaaS platform that monitors those apps. The solution prioritizes the most nefarious bugs as they occur, while gathering diagnostic data on hardware and software, so that developers can see what was happening on the device when it crashed. And, perhaps most importantly, developers are able to notify users when an issue has been fixed and can “specifically target users that ceased to use the application as a result of a crash or bug in the software”, according to Crittercism’s release. This feature may prove to be very important for user retention, a problem that has long beset app developers, as users often download an app once, use it a few times until a bug is spotted before dropping it. For more, check out Crittercism’s home page here and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A couple weeks ago, a stealthy startup called Prism SkyLabs was formed in San Francisco.  Already it’s creating buzz among angel investors.  It’s site is not much more than a place holder right now with this vague description: We are pioneering ways to bring physical spaces online, creating new places for people and businesses to understand and engage each other. A few more clues can be uncovered by looking at the two co-founders: CEO Steve Russell and president Ron Palmeri.  Russell previously founded 3VR, a digital video security company where he is currently chairman.  But Prism Skylabs is his new full-time gig. Palmeri was Halsey Minor’s right-hand man at Minor Ventures, where he backed and incubated GrandCentral (now Google Voice), OpenDNS, and Scout Labs, a social CRM and brand-monitoring service sold to Lithium Technologies (which turned into a lawsuit) So you’ve got a video surveillance expert and a Silicon Valley investor with a background in the consumer Web and social media analytics, and they want to “bring physical places online.”  My bet is that they do that through video.  Beyond that, we’ll have to keep digging.  But it sounds like this startup is aiming squarely for the ever-expanding online-to-offline market. We’ll keep our own video cameras trained on this one. Disclosure: Michael Arrington has committed to invest in Prism Skylabs. Latest headlines delivered to you daily I hope you’re not getting tired of daily deals, because I’ve got more daily deal news for you, dear reader. Among the latest trends in the evolving daily deal model are the now popular “deal wallet” and “deal resale marketplace”, which quite a few startups have begun implementing, like City Pockets and DealsGoRound, to name a few. Another area of the deal model that seems to be going through a redux is the consumer driven deals (CDD) approach, in which sites are letting consumers determine what deals they want to see offered by their favorite local merchants. Ringleadr recently launched a service to put consumers in the cockpit, as did Loopt with its new “U-Deals”. The consumer driven deal (or reverse deal, if you prefer) has been poked at by startups before, without prodigious success, but that is not to say that there isn’t room left for iteration and disruption, as the space on a whole is still relatively young. While Ringleadr and Loopt are both offering great services, one of the potential drawbacks to the structure of their models is that consumers have to wait for 15 days (in the case of Ringleadr) for the merchant to approve the deal. This is after the consumer has gotten a crowd of friends excited about the deal, enough so to get past the tipping point, and then has to wait over two weeks for the merchant to maybe decide to approve. SoBiz10, a Colorado-based startup, is attempting to turn the CDD screw even further by shortening the time it takes for merchants to approve a deal. The startup is taking a “consumers get the deals they want, at the price they want, when they want” approach, not to mention it’s all completely automated. Of course, this immediacy may sound like tyranny of the consumer, but SoBiz wants to offset this potential by giving businesses the ability to generate and retain new customers for a smaller revenue share (25 percent) than is typical among group coupon sites. (The average is about 50 percent.) But, before going any further, here’s how SoBiz works: Users get 10 of their friends together to decide on a deal they want and the merchant they want to patronize. A user then posts that deal on SoBiz, at which point the merchant receives an email, text, and voicemail, alerting them of the deal. The merchant has 48 hours to accept, deny, or counteroffer. If the deal is accepted, the 10 users are immediately sent their coupons in an email and can pay for them using the startup’s secure payment system. From there, merchants have the ability to display the deal more broadly in the SoBiz marketplace, with the option to control the availability, and SoBiz in turn alerts members of the community that the deal is more broadly available. On the merchant side, SoBiz10 Director of Operations John Morgans said that the only thing businesses have to do is create a profile to become a member. After they’ve created a profile, there is a page to enable CDD notifications. Therein, merchants can create the fine print they want to appear on all of their deals as well as enter bank routing info for payment to be sent 2 to 3 business days after each deal ends. After agreeing to the terms, CDD notifications are enabled and they business will begin receiving CDDs, both those that are sent directly to them as well as those sent to their entire business category. Each time they receive a CDD they will be notified. Another selling point for the SoBiz take is that 25-cents of every coupon sold is donated to a charity of the deal-creator’s choice, adding a non-profit and feel-good element to the service, a la CauseOn. Each of the non-profits on SoBiz has a profile. At any time, they can log on and view on their dashboard to see how much money has been donated. When they are ready to withdraw the donations, they email SoBiz, which then sends them a check. Morgans said that they are working on automating this process as well.  The other interesting part of the SoBiz platform comes from the fact that Founder and CEO Marion Mariathasan and team had originally built the service to be a social network, with a daily deal component as an add-on. As you can see from the image above, users and merchants can create profiles, just as one would on Facebook, write reviews of prior deals, connect with friends and merchants, and so on. The service also includes search functionality as well as deal categorization, so that consumers can request deals by category. If a user doen’t know who the best merchant is for, say, a new pair of reading glasses, they can go into the “Vision Category” to search for eyewear merchants. Categorization is an added bonus in comparison to Groupon and other deal sites — it adds a much-needed level of organization to the frantic world of coupons. Mariathasan compares the service to a kind of reverse Priceline.com, except in the case of Priceline, consumers are just reacting to the deals that Priceline has already negotiated, whereas automated consumer-driven deals puts the customer in the driver’s seat. SoBiz10 has been testing its model in Denver and Kansas City, with more than 17,000 consumers and 2,000 merchants participating. The startup recently forged its first big partnership with a national coupon-ing company, but is not yet sharing the terms, or the name of company, though two more are in talks with SoBiz. More to come on that. SoBiz is currently bootstrapped and seeking venture-backing to help bring its service to other cities. Lastly, the startup is providing TechCrunch readers with 100 free keys to the private beta, which you can take advantage of by emailing the team at contact@SoBiz10.com. Mariathasan said that SoBiz plans to launch its public beta later this summer. More on SoBiz in the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Modea, a digital advertising agency focused on design and technology, claims not only to help its clients build their brands (and advertise) but also to “make and design things they would use themselves”. While this is always a good litmus for a new product or business, you’ll have to excuse my cynicism, but coming from an advertising agency, statements like these are questionable. But, that being said, it’s great to see that Modea is an agency that builds products and apps, tinkering right alongside the companies whose brands they help to hawk. What’s more, they’ve built something today, called InstaEarth, that Instagrammers may very well find usable themselves. Instagram is fairly popular these days; the app hit 5 million users back in June and have been adding 625,000 users every month since launch. They seem to be doing with four people what Color couldn’t do with $41 million by focusing on providing a killer visual experience for their users. As my colleague MG Siegler made mention of, part of the reason they’ve been able to do this with such a small team is that they’ve focused on the mobile app and API, allowing developers to fill in the holes and help create the rest of the user’s experience. So, if Instagram is an app that allows “users to tell the story of their lives in a visual way”, InstaEarth is an app that visualizes the story of Instagram users worldwide — in map form. And it’s trying to be more than just another Google maps mashup. I’ll let you decide whether they’ve succeeded in this endeavor, but so far, I’m impressed. But, how in the sam heck does it work? InstaEarth allows you to navigate and explore Instagram photos on a global map layout, showing photos on the map in the location they were taken. (Though, of course, you have to connect the app to your Instagram account for it to have real useful application.) Users can organize the visual experience based on the popularity of the photos, the proximity to their current location, their own photos, photos of friends, etc. Users can zoom into any location on the map and view photos nearby taken by any other Instagram user, or enjoy the voyeurism inherent to clicking on any Instagram user and then viewing every location in which they’ve taken a photo. Slightly creepy? Maybe. Kinda cool? Yes. Of course, Instagram users have the option in the app’s settings to decide whether or not to share publicly at scale, so if you’re not the sharing type, not to worry. InstaEarth creators and Modea creative developers Chris Allnutt and Nathan Dicken have been Instagram users since they beginning, they say, and had long wanted to see a feature that allowed a more exploratory dimension to seeing the world through other Instagram users’ eyes. They’re off to a pretty good start, though there are some tweaks needed in the web interface. But so does TechCrunch. The founders said that they have plans to add UI enhancements soon, as well as a slide show view, “official” iPad mobile web support, realtime updates, search, and deeper integration with Google Places API. Alnutt said that his young son will get up every morning, eager to follow the travels and photography of users around the map. While this may not be the motivation you’re looking for, it is fun to play with, if not to wake up to. Check it out here and let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Uh oh. Now you’ve done it. You’ve lost your audience. The crowd that was once hanging on your every word and gasping for breath between laughs is now sending back nothing but vacant stares. A few people just snuck out the back door, and you’re pretty sure that dude in the back row is snoring. Where, oh where, did things go so wrong? A new app called Ovation is trying to help productions of all sorts (both live and online) figure out exactly where things start to suck, with a tool much like that used to gauge audience responses to TV pilots. It requires no downloads, and no sign-ups on the user’s part. Oh, and it’s totally free right now.  The idea is simple. So simple, in fact, that it’s easily described in two pictures. First, you create a URL for your event. You give your audience that URL, which they load up on their smartphone. This is what they see (here’s an interactive demo):  Members of your audience then use the on-screen slider to provide feedback. If they’re loving a certain section, they slide the bar up. If they hate it? They slide it down. Simple. There’s no signup process, and, as it’s a web app, it works across a ton of smartphones and mobile devices without any sort of installation. As the event unfolds, users see a real-time time line of their feedback thus far, with a second line showing the averaged response of everyone participating. After the event wraps up, you can peruse all of the feedback data in an interactive, second-by-second plot graph (demo here) like the one below:  The whole thing is executed well, and the idea itself is great… if they can get people to use it. Though the horribly impolite patrons of my local theater tend to forget it, there’s quite a stigma around busting out your phone during events (mainly because that bright screen is like a little tiny flashbang grenade when used in a dark theater). Even if the folks behind the production request that people provide live feedback, I’d imagine some folks would innately hesitate to do so. Another bit they might consider tweaking: it might be nice for the second line — the one that shows the average opinion of all participants — to be optional as set by the event coordinator. If user A loves something but sees that everyone else hates it (or vice versa), they might taper their response a bit for sake of going with the grain. The whole service is entirely free during this initial beta phase, but it’s also currently limited to 10 simultaneous responders per event. Need a bigger sample group? The team says they’re willing to help out. Not much of a live performer? Prefer to sit in front of your webcam with your bed sheet pinned to the wall and rant about why Ryan totally should have been kicked off of So You Think You Can Dance? Ovation also has an online video version of their tool, which applies the same gauging tools to videos posted on Youtube, Vimeo, or through their standalone player. So, the big question: would you use it? Latest headlines delivered to you daily May 23 - 25, 2011						 |Pier 94, New York, http://www.piers9294.com/about/parking/			  MotherKnows, an online health record service designed specifically for parents, has announced that it has raised $1.7 million in seed funding. The round was led by First Round Capital, with contributions from Giza Ventures, Charles River Ventures, The Band of Angels, former product manager at Google Health Maneesh Arora, and several other angels. The startup plans to use its infusion of capital to complete product development of the web and mobile products and initiate a consumer launch. MotherKnows is currently in closed beta, but its homepage is currently live and is accepting signups. A public launch is scheduled for late summer, according to Co-founder and CEO Hesky Kutscher. Kutscher and team presented onstage at this year’s TechCrunch Disrupt NYC, the review of which you can read here, and have since taken the advice of the judges and continued to iterate and expand the service, improving on design and ease-of-use. As of today, the vision for MotherKnows is to be a full-service platform, on both the Web and mobile, that gives parents 24-hour access to their children’s health records. The startup wants to be the go-to source for the aggregation of children’s health data, from immunizations and allergies to doctor visits and growth charts. All of these features can, of course, be accessed by parents, who in turn can approve the access of doctors, caregivers, camps, and schools, who can then use the data as a kind of supplemental electronic medical record. That being said, it is important to point out that a child’s personal health data is encrypted and protected and is never shared with third parties. Parents retain full control over which (if any) third party sites can access the data. MotherKnows is the team’s first product, but long-term plans, Hesky said, include the launch of products addressing “other consumer groups with specific health needs, such as home health care, extended families, and more”. For more, see our original profile of MotherKnows here, or visit their website here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s no doubt that online ticketing platform Eventbrite is growing like gangbusters. The platform is on track to sell $400 million worth of tickets this year, which is double the $207 million it did last year. The company could reach $1 billion in gross ticket sales in 2012. And part of Eventbrite’s future plan will include a public offering. Co-founder Kevin Hartz tells ZURB in a recently published podcast that Eventbrite could file to go public as early as late 2012 (at the 38 minute mark in the podcast) if the company reaches certain performance benchmarks. Hartz had some interesting commentary about going public in general. He believes companies should IPO earlier rather than later, and that staying private too long allows for “bad habits to fester” under little regulation. As for Eventbrite, Hartz says that he wants the company to be around 30 years from now and being a public company is part of that strategic plan. Eventbrite just raised another $50 million in a Series E financing round led by Tiger Global, bringing the company’s total funding to $80 million. Over 10 million people have attended an event ticketed by Eventbrite, and to date the platform has helped over 120,000 event organizers in 150 countries host more than half a million events. The performance benchmarks Hartz is referring to in the podcast most probably include ticket sales and revenue. In terms of revenue, $1 billion in ticket volume translates to roughly $50 million in revenues for Eventbrite. The platform takes a small cut of each sale. In order to scale even further, Eventbrite is hoping to create the ‘Eventbrite Box Office,’ for event planners. The startup is bundling together an iPad with an Eventbrite app, a card swipe, and a ticket printer so that event organizers can take payments and issue tickets at the event itself. Checkout Hartz speaking to Chris Dixon on this recent Founder Stories episode. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Always a pleasure to find that there are innovative startups building really cool stuff in my own backyard. Meet Wondergraphs, a bootstrapped company that is building Web-based software that lets people do beautiful things with data. Suddenly, analyzing corporate – or publicly available – data and creating graphs for reporting purposes becomes much more exciting than what it sounds like. The Wondergraphs tool lets you easily and rapidly upload data you want to base your reports on and churn out great-looking charts in a flash (video demo). The tool lets you aggregate, group and filter any data you throw at it, using drag-and-drop, and enables you to create clear charts on the fly. You can simply import data from Microsoft Excel through copy/paste, via CSV files or straight from online services like Google Spreadsheets and Factual. To fit the needs of developers, Wondergraphs also links to database systems like MySQL, Oracle, Microsoft SQLServer and MS Access, and offers an API upon request to boot. Any reports generated through Wondergraphs can be viewed online, or can easily be exported to Microsoft PowerPoint. The team is also building an impressive iPad app to add to the output line-up. One caveat: to create reports and analyze data, one must have Flash player 10 installed, although Flash is not required for viewing reports. Pricing varies from free to $25 per month or $100 per month for customers with lots of data to process (and they do have some current clients in that category) Wondergraphs has offices in Leuven, Belgium and Sunnyvale, California. The company has been developing its software for a few years now, and hasn’t raised a dime in outside funding yet. Wondergraphs co-founder and CEO Dirk Stevens tells me they’re currently looking for “the right type of early-stage investor” to step in and spur further growth. I have a feeling investors – particularly the few seed stage investors we have here in Belgium – will soon be kicking themselves for not finding out about this particular startup before this post.    Latest headlines delivered to you daily Location-based Q&A platform and Robert Scoble’s 2011 SXSW favorite pick Localmind has raised $600,000 in angel funding led by Granite Ventures with Real Ventures, iNovia Capital, Ian Sobieski, Peter Bordes, Ty Danco, Zach Aarons, and Ash Jhaveri participating. Localmind actually differs slightly from fellow Q&A apps like Opinionaided or Locql, because Localmind’s real-time, location-based platform sits on top of existing check-in services like Foursquare and Gowalla. Localmind actually allows you to ask questions of users checked-in at any location or venue. Users signup using their Foursquare, Gowalla, or Facebook Places account. Every time they check in with their location-based service on Localmind, they can be sent a question about that location. The startup’s iOS, Android and web app will show you who has checkin to a given location using LocalMind, and you can send questions about a venue to users. Questions are sent to the user using a push notification or SMS. Users can send follow-up messages, and also accrue karma points for helping others. For example, you could use Localmind to find out how crowded the bar is, what the specials a restaurant is offering, or whether the local Starbucks has a line. Localmind’s co-founder Lenny Rachitsky says that the platform, which launched at SXSW, took off at the convention because people wanted to know how long lines were at parties and which parties were fun. Currently, the apps collectively have 20,000 users, but is seeing a high rate of questions that are answered, with 70 percent of Localmind questions answered. Localmind also recently opened up its API to let startups leverage its realtime Q&A platform for their products. The startup plans to use the new funding for hiring and product development. Here’s the demo video Scoble took of Localmind at SXSW. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google AdSense co-founder Eytan Elbaz is announcing a round of funding from a group of all-star investors for his stealthy startup Scopely. Investors in the round (the amount of which was not disclosed) include Lerer Ventures, Greycroft Partners, Howard Lindzon, Terri Semel’s Windsor Media, David Cohen, Dave Tisch, Gil Elbaz, and Evan Rifkin. For background, Elbaz co-founded Applied Semantics, which he sold to Google for $100 million in 2003. Applied Semantics ended up becoming Google AdSense, and Eytan stayed on as Head of Domain Channel for Google. He left Google in 2007 to pursue other projects. Eytan declined to reveal exact details on what Scopely will focus on, but said that the startup will disrupt the social space that is “ripe for innovation.” He says that social networks have grown up quickly and Scopely’s product, which is being programmed in Node.js, will play in this arena. He adds that online advertising will play a part in Scopely as well. The angel investment will be used for product development and expanding the engineering team. Currently, the Scopely team includes 12 senior engineers and product managers from companies including Playdom, MindJolt, Warner Brothers, and Saatchi and Saatchi. The startup is even offering some lucrative referral incentives in case you are interested. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Shipwire, a company that offers retail businesses a service for order fulfillment, has received a strategic investment from e-commerce giant eBay and Newell Rubbermaid, the company behind the Calphalon, Rubbermaid and Goody brands. Existing investorMeakem Becker Venture Capital also participated in the round. While the company declined to reveal the investment amount, we hear the round’s value is $6 million. For online merchants, the process of selling and delivering a product can be complicated. Sellers need to know where all of their available inventory is at one time (a seller may have multiple channels where inventory is being shipped from). Once retailers knows where this inventory is, they have to display the lowest possible shipping rate to a buyer. The entire process can be complicated to automate via software. Instead, many merchants can outsource all of this Shipwire. The company’s SaaS platform gives businesses on-demand access to warehouses in the U.S., Canada and Europe allowing merchants to access inventory closer to buyers so that they can cut shipping costs and delivery times. The startup’s newest product, Shipwire Anywhere, allows merchants to  manage inventory and route orders to anyplace a seller has inventory stored e.g. a warehouse, garage, office closet, retail store, storage unit. The application essentially allow SMBs to manage orders and inventory regardless of where it is sold or where it is stored. The only cost associated with this inventory and order management software is the cost to actually print out the labels through Shipwire. Shipwire is currently being used by Rovio to ship its Angry Bird merchandise. eBay as a strategic investor is a big validation for Shipwire’s technology. And the investment is interesting considering that eBay’s competitor Amazon is also a competitor with Shipwire. Amazon  offers its Fulfillment by Amazon service, which allows online merchants to outsource their shipping to Amazon’s fulfillment centers. Interestingly, eBay is planning to launch its own fulfillment service later this year, and I wonder if Shipwire and eBay will become competitors when this happens (or eBay could just acquire Shipwire). The new funding, says Shipwire, will be used for the expansion of the Shipwire global warehouse network into new countries, and for additional product development efforts. As part of the investment, a Rubbermaid exec and Jean-Francois Van Kerckhove, Vice President and Head of Corporate Strategy at eBay, will join Shipwire’s advisory board. And the former president of FedEx Ground, Ivan Hoffman, will also join the Shipwire board of directors. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We first covered GENWI back in 2007, when the company was a social feed reader that allowed users to organize their content feeds by category and share with friends. GENWI has gone through several variations since, most notable among them the launch of iSites, a quick and easy mobile app development platform for iOS and Android, which led to a $1 million investment from Inventus and Quest Venture Partners. Today, the startup is announcing a rebranding, which is really a return to the GENWI name, folding iSites and iSites.us into the GENWI umbrella. The cloud-based smartphone and tablet app publishing platform continues to push forward in the mobile app development space, today launching an iPad app publishing solution and mobile content management system (CMS). As the company’s evolution has led it to a focus on providing media publishers with tools to create and manage newspaper, magazine, and catalog apps for iOS and Android, the iPad app solution is a logical extension to prior platform iterations — especially with the escalating adoption of tablets, specifically the iPad, as a content production tool and a source for some of the best (and most well designed) media apps. As such, GENWI’s iPad platform will allow publications and media companies (and everyone in between) to create cloud-backed iPad apps on the fly. According to GENWI Co-founder Raju Sagiraju, the solution is customizable and offers a branded experience for publishers. Adding new content and updates to apps is obviously extremely important to publishers, so GENWI’s solution offers flexible client architecture, just as it provides optimized templates and themes (a la WordPress) that enable businesses to shorten the app design process and duration. To that end, GENWI also offers an “Advanced Option”, which allows publishers to perform custom design development using HTML5 and CSS to create a unique design experience from scratch. With these tools in place, the solution’s goal is to provide media publishers, broadcasters, etc., with a platform that allows them to turn their print publications, newsletters, and podcasts into customized apps. As to the new mobile CMS, or mCMS as GENWI is calling it (apparently under trademark), allows publishers to add content in a bunch of different formats, including Media RSS, iTunes RSS, ATOM, XML, Restful APIs, CSV, InDesign, and PDF. The mCMS then aggregates content from these sources in realtime and pushes them out over the mobile landscape in such a way that is intended to be device-specific. And, like any other CMS, GENWI enables publishers to curate the aggregated content for each device. GENWI is currently serving 1,500 active apps on the iPhone and Android smartphones, from more than 30K publishers, according to Sagiraju. But, what will likely be most appealing to publishing companies and their developers is that GENWI apps do not have to be resubmitted to app stores for reapproval, and users don’t have to upgrade apps when small tweaks are made to the app’s design. This, then, is essentially akin to the capabilities of a SaaS product in the web space — a useful enhancement to the mobile app development space to be sure. Among other features, the GENWI platform also includes built-in monetization features like an ad and coupon management, analytics, and in-app subscriptions based on the iTunes payment system. In terms of cost, Sagiraju said that this will depend on usage and app interactions, but an iPad, iPhone, Android, and HTML5 app can be developed and launched at about $500 per month. This would include a limited version of GENWI’s mCMS, with advanced features and higher levels of usage involving further fees. Depending on the size of the publisher, these fees could hamstring them a bit, but many will likely be willing to pay for the ability to easily manage and publish apps across platforms. Check it out and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Music and technology company Scratch Music Group, which provides DJ services and operates a DJ and music production learning center co-developed with Jam Master Jay of Run DMC, has raised $3.3 million in funding. Contour Venture Partners led the financing round – the company’s first – with additional funding from the New York City Investment Fund and angel investors Jason Finger and Todd Arky, of SeamlessWeb, and Jacob Pechenik, co-founder and CEO of YellowJacket Software. Founded a decade ago, Scratch Music Group has become one of the leading service providers in the DJ space, representing over 700 DJs across the United States. To date, the company says, Scratch has provided DJs for more than 15,000 events and over 50 national tours for brands, including MTV, Vans, Bloomingdale’s, ESPN, Pepsi and H&M. Over the past year, the company has expanded its services into the wedding market, offering couples a mix of customer service, personalized music choices, social network-enabled playlist software and more. Scratch plans to use the proceeds of this financing to fund the growth of its Scratch Weddings business in addition to its Scratch DJ Academy, Scratch Events and Scratch Software businesses. Scratch Music Group recently moved its corporate headquarters to the iconic Village Voice building in Manhattan’s East Village. The company also has offices in Miami and Los Angeles. Latest headlines delivered to you daily The whiz kids behind Mint’s infographics, Stewart Langille and Lee Sherman are today launching the first startup that solely focuses on mass producing infographics, Visually. Users who visit Visually this morning can see over 2000 infographics uploaded by designers like Jess3 and Dave McCandless as well as upload their own in a myriad of topics ranging from Science to Sports to the Economy. In its first launch iteration, Visually has partnered up with The Atlantic, GOOD Magazine CNNMoney.com, Ebay, The National Geographic and others to provide infographics content in exchange for sharing links — On Visually each participating publication gets to upload its own graphics, which are embedded and shared using an code generated by Visually. Visually plans on monetizing eventually by letting publications subscribe to its offerings via a monthly fee. “Everyone needs to create a graph or a chart or something, and the software that’s currently out there is more focused on business intelligence” Langille says. “There is a definite need to create simple visualizations for people. Within three clicks you can create visualizations for the sites.” Langille hopes with Visually to create a community of designers a la Dribbble or Forrst, but also hopes to rope in infographic producers that are concerned with issues like exposure and monetization. If and when the basic infographics part of the site includes advertising he wants to incorporate artist friendly business practices like revenue sharing. In addition to letting people upload and download infographics today, Visually has created a Twitterize Yourself widget that allows Twitter users to compare themselves against celebrities like Lady Gaga and Michael Arrington and create an infographic out of the experience. While there isn’t much practical benefit from this, it is pretty delightful. This automated process is a harbinger of Visually product developments to come, as eventually Langile is about to introduce an interface where customers will be to be able to enter in data and have the visuals come out, with the choices of various artist’s styles baked in to the service. The duo have almost 500K in seed funding to make this dream come true. Langille tells me, “It’s already the largest collection of infographics on the web.” Nice.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Earlier this year, social media client Sobees launched NewsMix, an iPad app which presents news and content shared by your social circle in a magazine format on the device. It’s similar in functionality to Flipboard, Summify or Pulse. Today the company is launching a browser-based, more social news aggregator. The site, which is designed with HTML5, allows you to create and mix a digital magazine composed of content shared in your Twitter, Facebook and RSS feeds (GoogleReader and feed search). The app will categorize content in a magazine or show news in a separate timeline format for Facebook and Twitter. And you can view photos and videos in separate sections. The new version of NewsMix not only displays your Twitter updates but it also lets you subscribe to newspapers and blogs and to Twitter users to read their Tweets, Twitter Favorites and personal mix of news. So you can subscribe to the personalized magazines shared by your friends as well as blogs and newspapers. Sobees also offers a bookmarklet that allows you to add content from your browser into NewsMix. Similar to the iPad app, NewsMix features Sobees’ proprietary curation technology, which will will automatically prioritize and curate Twitter and Facebook posts based on your interactions with the app. For now, the web application is free, but sobees plans on implementing a premium version of the web app in the foreseeable future (the iPad app costs $2.99). Latest headlines delivered to you daily Foursquare this morning announced distribution partnerships with daily deal providers LivingSocial, Gilt City, zozi, BuyWithMe and AT&T. Missing from the list are Groupon, Yelp and Google Offers. With these deals, Foursquare is attempting to solve two problems: liquidity in deals and its own lack of a revenue model. Foursquare already has a reasonable number of deals on its own. How many, exactly, it refuses to say. But I even found one during a stopover in Ketchikan, Alaska. I couldn’t get a 3G signal, but I could get a Foursquare deal. Foursquare will now distribute the deals to its users on behalf of its partners. At this stage of the mobile deals market, it helps all of the players out there to work together. None of these companies have all of the pieces of the puzzle: Foursquare has distribution, but no local salesforce. LivingSocial and the others have salesforces and some deals but no meaningful mobile distribution. Without cooperation, you run into the Color problem—you check to see what’s there, see nothing, check again, see nothing and then stop checking. A single purpose deals app will get old quickly. Deals need to be shown where people already are for other reasons. Foursquare is one of those outlets. The company won’t disclose how many monthly unique users it has, but I would estimate it at 2-3 million, based on typical Internet decay rates of registered users and its recent milestone of 10 million registered users. However, I see three key challenges with Foursquare deals: There is also competition between Foursquare and its partners. Tomorrow, LivingSocial is offering $1 lunches at more than 100 places in San Francisco to promote the launch of LivingSocial Instant. I asked LivingSocial if those deals will be available through the Foursquare app. “Tomorrow’s dollar lunch will only be available thru the LivingSocial apps or the LivingSocial website,” replied spokeswoman Maire Griffin. In other words, LivingSocial would like you to install their app. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Moolah Media, a recently launched mobile ad network that uses a cost-per-action and cost-per-lead model is launching a number of formats today and announcing a $3 million developer fund to give publishers additional payouts for using Moolah. The network launched last year allowing advertisers to drive inbound calls directly to a call center, collect signups and registration leads, while also tracking conversions. Moolah promises higher payouts and 100 percent fill rates for publishers, and ads can be placed within apps, on the mobile web or within text messages. Today, Moolah is rolling three formats that can be used either for display or in-app advertising. With co-registration ads, users register with the mobile app or website, and are then shown a series of highly relevant offers, which they can choose to skip or view. For example, Moolah’s co-registration can also be used to unlock content within a mobile site or game or access an educational deal. eCPMs for co-registration ads range from $200-$400, or $0.25-$0.60 average revenue per user. Moolah’s notifications display or in-app ads allow users to opt in to receive notifications (either device tray for Android or SMS for mobile web) with status updates and deal alerts. The startup say developers and publishers can expect eCPMs ranging from $8-$15 and recurring ARPUs of $0.05 to $0.20 per month. Moolah is also offering standard display ads that are targeted based on device type, carrier, category, and other parameters. Using display, developers and publishers can expect 100 percent fill rates and $0.25 to $4.00 eCPMs. As we mentioned, Moolah is announcing a $3 million developer fund that will offer an additional 33 percent payout for all new publishers and developers that use the new formats. This is on a top of any money earned through the advertising channel. To me, it seems that Google/AdMob, Millennial or other mobile ad networks could also easily turn on these formats to their massive amount of publishers and advertisers. But the payout should help attract new customers and developers to the network, which could help give Moolah a leg up when these other networks adopt more cost-per-action mobile ad formats. Latest headlines delivered to you daily One of the key ingredients when it comes to building a solid software product is ensuring that your team of developers, project managers, and other key personnel are all on the same page. That need has given rise to a variety of services and applications designed to make this a bit easier. And today sees a new, slick-looking entry to this market called Interstate, brought to us by Y Combinator-funded company Baked Code. The goal of Interstate, say founders Greg Cooper and Simon Fletcher, is to offer developers a tracking tool that hits the sweet spot between 37signals’s Basecamp — which they say is fairly basic — and PivotalTracker, which has loads of nuts and bolts. The application includes the functionality you’d expect from a development roadmap app: you can the current status of each task (and subtask), plot out where things should be over the coming weeks, and attach supplementary files to each task. Oh, and it’s very nice looking (and you can tweak the theme if you’d like). Once you first log in, you’ll be asked to get started on your roadmap. Tasks can be created as ‘Roads’, which in turn can be bundled together to create overarching ‘Routes’. The project admin can invite coworkers, and can also set which roadmaps they’re able to edit and view. There’s also a feature that the founders believe is unique to Interstate: the app allows developers to publicly display a portion (or all, if you’re feeling especially transparent) of their roadmap. This can help keep users informed on your current progress, without having to deal with a constant stream of inbound inquiries (this was one of the motivations for initially building the app — Cooper and Fletcher say they were tired of getting asked about their progress).  At this point Interstate is being released as a free public beta, but eventually the service will start charging (the founders say they’re still figuring out the ideal price point and model). The company already has some well-known clients, including DailyBooth, Seesmic, Media Temple, Virginia Tech, and Michigan Tech. In addition to the aforementioned Basecamp and PivotalTracker, Interstate will be competing with Asana (which is still in private beta). If you’re looking for a management tool that isn’t necessarily targeted toward developers, also see MetaLab’s Flow. Note that this is the first of Baked Code’s products, and it sounds like more may eventually be in the works.Latest headlines delivered to you daily For the past few years, Kontagent, an  fbFund winner and social analytics platform, has offered user analytics for developers of Facebook apps and games. Today, the company is moving beyond the social network to web and mobile apps that have not been built off the Facebook platform. As we’ve written in the past, Kontagent’s real-time platform gives Facebook app developers, game studios and publishers detailed data of demographics based on geographic location, age groups, gender, user engagement times, social event interaction and other variables. The new version allows developers to  track and optimize advertising efforts, user virality, in-app mechanics, virtual goods, currency monetization, and more. Called kSuite, Kontagent’s data analysis platform can now identify usage patterns on social and mobile apps in real time. The platform measures data by event and custom inputs, and examines how virality of an application or website. Kontagent has been able to scale its analytics platform on Facebook, so it should be interesting to see how the startup performs outside of the social network. Kontagent tracks over 100 million monthly active users and over 15 billion messages per month on Facebook.  Its monthly active user base has increased by over 300% in the past 12 months and counts a number of well known game developers as clients, including EA, Sony, Ubisoft, Take2, THQ, Konami, Perfect World, Gaia and Tencent. Latest headlines delivered to you daily MemSQL may not have the sexiest name or, as a database management software startup, live in the sexiest industry, but that doesn’t mean it isn’t appealing to investors. The Y Combinator Winter 2011 grad is announcing today that it has raised $2.1 million in seed funding, led by an impressive list of angels and VCs. The stalwart list includes venture backing from First Rounds Capital, New Enterprise Associates, Start Fund, SV Angel, and Y Combinator — as well as participation from celeb tech investor Ashton Kutcher, early Google employee and FriendFeed Co-founder Paul Bucheit, Loopt Founder Sam Altman, Guy Oseary, and several others. MemSQL will be using this infusion of capital to complete its move into new offices in downtown San Francisco as well as adding to its current team of six. But just what is it about this young startup that has investors fired up? MemSQL is a scalable in-memory database that, according to co-founder and CEO Eric Frenkiel, is up to 30-times faster than relational databases on disk. The database primarily focuses on online transaction processing (OLTP) workloads, and aims to deliver speed and through-put advantages, while retaining SQL and ACID compliance without resorting to NoSQL or caching technologies. While online transaction processing software may be unknown to some, it helps manage transaction-oriented applications in data entry and retrieval, work that is integral to a number of industries, including banking, airlines, supermarkets, and manufacturers. As such, it’s a space that is poised to grow from $20 billion to $60 billion in value over the next five years, Frenkiel said. This is largely due to the fact that the size of data sets being employed by major web companies is doubling every 18 months. Today, memory is cheap and abundant, and these large data sets can finally fit into memory systems. So, while input/output remains sluggish in the cloud, so companies that want to optimize their data sets and achieve performance in the cloud is to go into memory. Google, Facebook, Twitter, Zynga, and more, already have their datasets living in memory and backed-up on disk. MemSQL has built a database from the ground up to allow applications to read and write at the same time, run analytics in realtime — all in an effort to provide a faster alternative to MySQL on disk — 30 times faster, according to the team. Plus, MemSQL’s software “speaks MySQL protocol”, so, according to Frenkiel, that means that there is no need for a code change for applications that talk to MySQL databases. “If you want to achieve real performance in the cloud, you need to take the database into memory, and all the better if you can use SQL to access it”, Frenkiel says. It’s also likely that MemSQL won over investors based on the credentials of its team, counting former Facebook, Oracle, and SQL server engineers among its ranks. It also helps that Frenkiel’s co-founder, Nikita Shamgunov, spent 6 years as a senior database engineer at Microsoft, holds a masters and PhD in computer science, has several patents to his name, and is a world medalist in computing machinery contests. Not to mention, MemSQL’s first customer is fellow Y Combinator Winter 2011 alum, LikeALittle, which hit 20 million pageviews within 6 weeks of its launch and raised a round of seed funding from an equally impressive list of investors (several of whom also invested in MemSQL). LikeALittle has since raised another $5 million from Andreessen-Horowitz, among others. Seeing as LikeALittle is already being valued at $35 million, the fact that MemSQL is providing much of the technology that has allowed its fellow startup to scale and perform well in spite of a huge influx of traffic (and resulting data), the $2.1 million investment seems a sound one, to say the least. To get invitations to MemSQL’s private beta, visit their homepage here. And they’re also hiring, so for developers looking for a startup with a hacker-centric culture (and former Facebook talent), click here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When I first wrote about Evoz‘s take on modern baby monitoring systems, many thought it was a hoax (which I suspect may have had something to do with the fact that I posted it on April Fools Day). But it’s real, and I’ve actually tested it quite a few times since becoming a first-time dad three months ago. In short, Evoz lets parents use their iOS device and the Evoz baby monitoring service to monitor their babies from anywhere, with the touch of a button. Evoz has virtually unlimited range and can send alerts (call, text, or email) whenever your baby starts crying. Backed by Dave McClure’s 500 Startups, the company’s broad vision is to enable active parents to monitor the health and wellbeing of their babies even when they’re on the go. In order to use Evoz, you will need to install Evoz on two iOS devices (get the app here). One will be the receiver and the second needs to connect to WiFi in order to be the monitor. In the future, more mobile platforms will be supported and the company is understandably also going to offer a monitoring device of their own. Once the system is set up, parents who are out working, traveling, dining or partying can proactively receive texts, emails or phone calls when their baby is crying, giving them the opportunity to contact whoever is taking care of the child at that particular moment – or go home. Evoz also captures data in an effort to collect sufficient information to let parents better understand the health of their children. In addition, the app enables parents to easily get in touch with a network of baby health experts or sleep consultants if they have any questions or concerns. The company was founded in 2010 by Avishai Shoham (CEO), Ruwan Welaratna (CTO) and Yasmin Lukatz (COO). Beta participants will receive two free weeks of the premium service, including unlimited streaming anywhere in the world, unlimited email and texts, data collection and an exclusive look at new features. After the two-week period, the premium service will cost $7.99 per month, although Evoz says you’ll still be able to listen from anywhere for 30 minutes a day at no charge.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Omek Interactive, a provider of tools that enables companies to incorporate gesture recognition and full body tracking into their applications and devices, has secured $7 million in financing in a round led by Intel Capital, TechCrunch has learned. The Series C round brings the company’s total funding raised to nearly $14 million. Omek’s Beckon technology converts the raw depth map data from most major 3D cameras into an awareness of people and their movements or positions in front of the camera, enabling them to be converted into commands that control hardware or software. The technology lets companies, ranging from consumer electronics and computer manufacturers, games and application developers, ad agencies and digital signage companies to videoconferencing and telepresence providers, create gesture and body tracking interfaces (often called NUIs) like the ones popularized by Microsoft’s Kinect for Xbox and Sony’s PlayStation Move. Omek says it will use the investment to expand its product and technology teams, develop new products for specific target markets, and extend its business development and technical support presence in key customer regions. The company’s partners include Lenovo’s Eedoo (Omek provides the software that powers the company’s brand new game console), PMD and Panasonic, among others.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Tandem Entrepreneurs, an incubator and capital fund founded in 2007, invests both money and time in early-stage startups, but founders Doug Renert and Sunil Bhargava don’t consider themselves VCs. Instead, they’re just a group of entrepreneurs with decades of startup experience between them that have turned their focus to providing resources to their fellow entrepreneurs and startup founders. And today they’re announcing the creation of a new incubator, targeted specifically at early-stage startups in the mobile space. Of course, what’s an incubator without cool digs? Tandem will be establishing the new incubator’s headquarters in a newly-renovated Victorian home in Burlingame, CA, with its doors officially set to open on August 3rd. Tandem will be accepting applications from mobile startups beginning today, and plans to select eight teams to participate in its fall program, which will continue annually thereafter. (Applications are due by September 1st.) The program will take place over a six-month time frame with Tandem providing a mix of both support and cash investment. This means that the Tandem team will be working hand-in-hand with founders to assist in strategy, product design, architecture, user acquisition, employee recruiting, etc., and each company will receive $200,000 in a convertible note in exchange for 10 percent common equity. As such, Tandem is looking to find a middle ground between Y Combinator, TechStars, and Sequoia, in an effort to provide start-to-finish experiential guidance for their startups along with a chunk of capital that can really help a product or service get off the ground. Just as Paul Graham of Y Combinator has said that he often chooses to invest in people rather than ideas, the company said that its search will prioritize entrepreneurs with product skills and overall vision — that the passion of candidates is more important than market traction. Eight of Tandem’s last nine portfolio companies have received positive liquidity or additional funding at stepped-up valuations while working with the incubator. Among those were Attassa’s acquisition by YouSendIt, FlightCaster’s acquisition by Next Jump, and ZumoDrive’s acquisition by Motorola. Tandem has also incubated both PlayHaven and Juice in the City, the latter of which raised $6 million in June. While high quality incubators and accelerators are to be found across the U.S., Tandem hopes to distinguish itself from the pack not only by focusing its efforts on the exploding mobile space but by offering highly-involved guidance from strategic down to field tactics. It also helps that the incubator will be offering its eight startups ten times the average investment Y Combinator makes in its startups, though that does come at a price of 10 percent equity. Check it out, and let us know what you think. For more on Tandem entrepreneurs, click here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive-Personal finance site for women LearnVest has raised $19 million in Series B funding from Accel Partners and other existing investors including, Richmond Management, Rose Tech Ventures, Circle Financial Group and PKS Capital. We’re told two additional financial parties participated in the round but these names are not being disclosed at this time. To date, LearnVest has raised $24.5 million. LearnVest, which launched at TechCrunch50 in 2009, has a simple goal: to help women organize their finances and learn how to become financially savvy. It’s kind of like an online version of financial planner Suze Orman blended with personal finance site Mint.com. Founded by entrepreneur Alexa Von Tobel, the startup aims to fill a big hole in terms of providing an online destination that is catered towards educating women about finance. Von Tobel tells us that the company will use the funding to continue to build better products for its users. What makes LearnVest unique is that it goes beyond just aggregating your financial information and actually helps women become more educated about personal finance. For example, the startup launched three online programs last year, called ‘bootcamps,’ to educate women on various financial subjects, including a Financial Basics Bootcamp, Cut Your Costs Bootcamp, and Investing Bootcamp. The company also sends users a daily email with financial tips and information called the LearnVest Daily. The Investing Bootcamp teaches women how to make smart investing decisions and properly allocate their portfolios. For three weeks, women will receive daily emails with advice and actionable items that they can perform on LearnVest, making the newsletter interactive. For example, for the Financial Basics bootcamp, one of the daily actionable items is ‘Get Your Credit Score.’ Cut Your Costs Bootcamp topic range from Bootcamp topics range from ways to save on energy bills to exactly how to negotiate a lower cable bill. Learnvest incorporates all of the information users complete and input in bootcamps into their LearnVest account. Currently, LearnVest’s Bootcamp Programs are the focus of a $150,000 study by the Financial Literacy Center, a joint center of the RAND Corporation, Dartmouth College, and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. LearnVest is also adding two new advisors to its board, including Greg Waldorf, former CEO of eHarmony; and Greg Coleman, former President and Chief Revenue Officer of The Huffington Post, and the current President of Criteo. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive-Social commerce network Lockerz has acquired social sharing platform AddToAny. Financial terms of the acquisition were not disclosed. AddToAny, which has never raised any outside financing and is profitable, allows users to share and bookmark online content with social networks, news aggregators, email services, and instant messengers. The company was one of the first to offer a social sharing and bookmarking widget for website publishers and currently reaches 500 million unique users per month. For monetization, AddToAny sells anonymous aggregate sharing data, which is used by clients to increase the relevancy of their ads. Revenue projections for 2012 ranged in the seven figures. To date, AddToAny’s WordPress plugin has been downloaded over 1.8 million times, and their Drupal module is actively installed on over 14,000 websites. As wee’ve reported in the past, Lockerz revolves around the idea that influencers within a social network can become brand and content advocates and affect the behavior of their friends. The network, which says it is seeing 45 million monthly uniques, is primarily targeted towards men and women ages 13 to 30, attempting to build a community of trendsetters and tastemakers who love to shop, play and connect on the Web. Users can earn points and discounts on brands by sharing content on the site. Founded by Kathy Savitt, a former Amazon and American Eagle Outfitters exec; Lockerz eventually wants to be the go-to commerce homepage for teens and young adults. Currently, 53 percent of the site’s users are college-aged; explains Savitt. And she sys that the site is seeing 15 minutes of engagement per member, compared to five minutes per member 6 months ago. With the AddToAny acquisition, Lockerz expands its online sharing platform, which serves more than 1 billion photos per month via Lockers Photos and to date has issued nearly 200 million Decalz (akin to badges). And Savitt says that AddToAny’s founder Pat Diven II is a huge talent win for Lockerz. Savitt says to that AddToAny will continue uninterrupted for both publishers and users but Lockerz will invite AddToAny users to become Lockerz members and begin earning rewards, or PTZ, for sharing content on the web. Over time, Lockerz and AddToAny plan to add additional features to the sharing widget while expanding Lockerz’s network of services. For Lockerz, this is the second major acquisition in a matter of months. In January, Lockerz acquired photo sharing app Plixi as a way to boost photo sharing on its platform. The deal was reportedly between $10 million and $15 million. And the company just closed on an major investment round, which Savitt confirmed. She says the round is significantly north of $30 million and the deal has added new investors. The company previously raised  $30 million from Kleiner Perkins, Liberty Media and the CEO of Liberty Greg Maffei. Latest headlines delivered to you daily MoPub, a mobile advertising startup founded by ex-AdMob and Google employees, has raised $6.5 million in new funding led by Accel Partners with participating from Harrison Metal Capital. Both firms invested seed funding in the startup last December. Accel Partner Rich Wong will be joining MoPub’s board. MoPub, which part of the first AngelPad class, develops a self-serve ad serving platform for mobile applications and websites that allows mobile publishers to serve direct-sold rich media banner and interstitial ads in addition to optimizing their remnant inventory with networks like AdMob, Jumptap, and Millennial Media. It is essentially a DoubleClick for mobile ads. With mobile advertising expected to grow to a $20 billion market by 2015, publishers and advertisers are increasingly looking to mobile for serving campaigns and earning money. MoPub itself compares its offering as a mobile analogue to DoubleClick for Publishers  and AdMeld, which was recently purchased by Google for $400 million. It allows publishers to book and manage mobile rich media interstitials, banners and custom formats, whether on a direct sold basis or brokered through a network. MoPub is open to any mobile publisher and serves ads across Android, iOS and mobile web platforms. Often large-scale publishers will broker direct deals with advertisers and agencies for campaigns.  MoPub allows publishers to manage and serve these advertisements on mobile apps and sites as well as fill the rest of their inventory with ads from networks. The company’s real-time optimization will detect whether an ad is performing well and will automatically switch low-performing ads across another network. Although MoPub only launched in February, the startup recently crossed the 1 billion monthly ads mark in June. MoPub currently has over 250 active publishers and is now doubling that number every quarter.CEO Jim Payne tells us that the site aims to be a one stop shop for developers to turn apps into actual businesses, allowing them to manage all their mobile campaigns and ads. And Wong, who was Accel’s lead investor in AdMob, is bullish on where the startup is heading. he says, “MoPub is part of a new wave of mobile ads companies that are moving the industry forward very rapidly. In a short time, they have put together a widely used product and an incredible team that I believe can build the next big mobile monetization company.” As for what’s next for MoPub, Payne believes the future of mobile advertising is around realtime bidding, and creating a realtime way to connect the demand side with the buy side. Payne says that Google is done a great job with this model for display but there isn’t one company that has captured the same market share as Google in the mobile advertising world. And while Google integrated mobile ads into DoubleClick, Payne says that this offering is more oriented for mobile web and doesn’t handle rich media campaigns or is optimized for device fragmentation. Payne says the new funding will be used to double the company’s engineers and to bolster the infrastructure of the startup’s technology. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Some people like to broadcast every moment of their lives, but when you are dealing with business contacts that tends to be more of a private activity.  Mobile startup Hashable is learning that helping people over-share is not always the right way to go. The company pushed out a significantly redesigned app for both iPhone and Android which changes the focus to more of a personal mobile CRM app for professionals.  You can still use Hashable as a digital replacement for business cards, but instead of encouraging users to broadcast each meeting, the default is now private. The hash button is now front and center, enticing you to record your meetings.  Some of the new features include the ability to add private notes about contacts and set up reminders for yourself that populates your calendar. The address book, which brings in contacts from both email and Twitter, now lists people in reverse chronological order based on your last interactions with them.  It also is easier to send follow-up emails or Tweets right from the app. “The service has really morphed into a mobile CRM,” says CEO Michael Yavonditte.  “Our heaviest users preferred more privacy, less broadcasting.” Despite pushing hard and growing steadily, Hashable only has about 60,000 active users.  (Chief marketing officer Emily Hickey recently left the company).  The redesign should appeal more to hardcore networkers and other serious users.  And now the company plans to make a big push with its Android app  (which lets you bump phones to exchange contact information via an NFC chip). The focus now is very much on helping people manage their business lives rather than boasting about who they #justmet. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online gaming company Ignite Game Technologies has raised $7.5 million in Series B financing from private investors in a round led by Steve Bellotti and Bill Budinger. The company raised a $3 million Series A round in 2010 and has raised a total of $12.2 million in funding. The company will use the additional capital for the development of a “new form of auto racing game”. Exactly when it will launch and what it will bring to the table remains unclear. The company operates a website at SIMraceway.com where you can sign up for a beta of a game, which I assume is the one they’re referring to, although this wasn’t made clear in the press statement. In it, the startup posits that it will provide gamers with an entirely new online auto racing experience that is “bound to shake up traditional racing gameplay” by emphasizing live online multiplayer gaming, a high-fidelity physics engine and “proprietary player skill quantification technology”. The product will debut later this year in the fall. Ignite is based in San Francisco and founded in 2008 by Jonathan Haswell and James Synge. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile application developer skyrockit this morning announced that it has raised $2.6 million in new funding from Intel Capital with participation from Asuka DBJ Partners and former Linden Lab CEO Mark Kingdon. skyrockit plans to use the additional capital to boost its existing entertainment products and services, which includes the virtual Zippo Lighter for the iPhone, and develop new applications. The company works for carriers such as AT&T, Sprint and T-Mobile, handset manufacturers, media companies and brands. Another one of its services, ROMPLR, is a music remix platform for iOS and Nokia that currently has over 1.1 million users across more than 95 countries. Skyrockit is based in San Francisco and was renamed from Moderati (previously Faith West) back in 2009. The startup claims it has generated more than $300 million in revenue for its partners and more than 100 million pieces of its content have been consumed. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A new startup is launching today in the fitness tech space that aim to help personal trainers better connect with their clients and the general public. Fitview is launching as a comprehensive SaaS for fitness trainers to upload a fitness curriculum, keep track of client progress and more. With Fitview, which was built by former Apple product architects, personal trainers can create groups for the client base, distribute news, results and updates to groups; schedule and share workouts and events; track attendees and performance; maintain client information; and message clients. Users can also view and update personal workouts, track individual progress and goals and more. And Fitview comes with both mobile (iOS app) and web capabilities. For background, Fitview has raised funding from a number of investors including the former CEO of Palm Ed Colligan. Founder Calin Pacurariu was a former director of developer solutions and Treo product manager from Handspring, and a product lead at Apple (his name actually appears alongside Steve Jobs’ on a few patents). And FitView is already being used at a number of gyms including CrossFit. I think there is actually a need for a platform like Fitview that allows trainers and clients to connect over the web as well as in the gym. For example, I’d love to to be able to access my workout schedule that I have with my trainer on the weekends so I could try to replicate it in my own gym. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Gain Fitness, a startup that creates personalized workouts based on certified trainers’ expertise, is launching an iPhone app today that allows fitness enthusiasts to access programs on the go. Founded by former Googlers, Gain Fitness launched to give users personal trainer quality exercise without the hassle of researching workouts or booking expensive trainers. Now you can bring these workouts into the gym with the Gain iPhone app, which costs $2.99 in the App Store. The app features 700-plus exercises (strength, plyometric, callisthenic, yoga), and unique workouts, custom-tailored to you. The startup is also announcing that Crunch Fitness founder Doug Levine has also joined its advisory board. The new app will create workouts based on free time, fitness level, body, goals and other factors. And the apps will recommends exact exercises, sets, reps, and rests, so tracking is easy. And for those who are using the app for multiple workouts per week, Gain’s app will create a different workout every time to keep things fresh. The beauty of Gain is that it democratizes the act of having a personal trainer. Hiring a trainer to give you dynamic, tailored workouts can be an expensive task. For $2.99 Gain is giving anyone the ability to access professional, high-quality workouts that are also personalized to your fitness goals, body type and more. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Adzerk is in the midst of closing a $650,000 seed round from a mix of institutional and angel investors to build a “next generation” ad serving platform that includes features like real-time reporting, ultra-fast ad serving and network building support. The company is raising seed capital from Great Oaks Venture Capital, Robert Senoff, Invite Media co-founders Nat Turner and Zach Weinberg, former Accipiter CEO and GM at Microsoft Brian Handly, Halogen Networks’ Peter Horan and Neil Patel. Adzerk already counts Stack Overflow, StatSheet and a number of ad networks as its customers. The startup grew from two niche ad networks – The Lounge and Ruby Row – which were run by James Avery, founder of Adzerk and also the co-founder of TekPub, a site devoted to helping developers learn from high-quality screencasts. The additional capital will be used to enhance the platform to provide publishers and ad networks with more flexibility and control over their ad serving. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Social Q&A site Formspring, where more than 3 billion questions have been answered so far, had a marketing moment today.  For the first time, the Question of the Day was a promoted question: “What do you think would happen if apes took over? #apeswillrise” The question promotes the upcoming movie Rise Of The Planet Of The Apes, which is the prequel to the classic Planet Of The Apes hence the #apeswillrise hashtag).  The question has been answered more than 76,000 times, which is a decent level of engagement for a one-day campaign.  (You can see my answer above).  It is on track to beat yesterday’s non-sponsored Question of the Day, which garnered 148,000 answers. This is not the first brand campaign on Formspring, but it is the first promoted Question of the Day. Formspring uses the Question of the Day to keep up overal engagement with its users.  Formspring is a service where people ask each other questions and spread those questions on Facebook and Twitter. It is close to hitting 3.5 billion answers, and now has 25 million registered users. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in March we wrote about Zaarly, a startup that lets you post an odd job and find someone to complete it for a modest fee. It, and similar services like TaskRabbit, have honed in on a key idea: there are a lot of intelligent, hardworking people who have some spare time and would love to make a few bucks during their off hours. And there are also plenty of people who would love to skip running to the dry cleaners when they have a report due the next morning by 7AM. Now there’s a startup called Zipments that’s offering a similar service with a slightly different twist: they’re focusing exclusively on courier jobs (or, as they call them, logistics). Need something delivered in a jiffy? Fire up Zipments, set a price, and someone will (hopefully) be ready to deliver it within the hour. In short, Zipments is looking to create a crowdsourced courier service that lets you send things across town on the cheap. The service has been live in Grand Rapids, Michigan since May, and starting today it’s expanding to Chicago and New York City. The interface for Zipments, which is currently web-only but has mobile apps in the works, is pretty straightforward: you describe the job, mark out the start and end points on a map, and say how long it can take (the specified time needs to be reasonable). You can set an initial price, but other users are free to make other offers (either higher, if they think the job is worth more than you’re asking, or lower, if they’re facing a lot of competition). Choose someone to serve as your courier and they’ll be sent your phone number, pick-up/delivery addresses, and other relevant information. The word “courier” may remind longtime TechCrunch readers of ill-fated startups like Lickety Ship, which were essentially aggregators of professional courier services. The difference here is that Zipment isn’t relying on these professional services, so the prices involved should be lower. Of course, that comes with a tradeoff: Zipments isn’t doing much to guarantee that your order will be completed properly (there’s a small risk that someone could actually run off with whatever you want delivered). The service does a few things to address this — you need a Paypal account to register, for example, so users aren’t anonymous. And each user has a profile where you can leave a poor review if you have a bad experience. But for the time being, even the company isn’t recommending that you use this to transport highly important or valuable goods. And in the future, they’ll be looking into offering insurance and bonding options for these more sensitive jobs. Zipments doesn’t appear to have any competitors that are focusing exclusively on these courier tasks, but if it takes off, it isn’t hard to imagine TaskRabbit or Zaarly launching a similar product (and you can obviously post delivery jobs to both of those services today).   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile ad network Mojiva has raised $25 million in new funding, we’ve confirmed.  New investor Shamrock Capital Advisors led the round with participation from existing investors Pelion Venture Partners and Bertelsmann Digital Media Investments. To date Mojiva has raised $35.3 million. Mojiva develops a self service ad platform that allows advertisers and publishers to manage mobile ad campaigns. The Mocean Mobile ad serving platform serves display ads to all mobile devices including smartphones, tablets and netbooks. Founded in 2008, the company currently works with more than 3,000 advertisers and publishers, and its network serves 190 countries and reaches over 400 million users worldwide. The company’s publishers include ABC, Univision, TMZ, and the International Business Times. The company partners with rich media providers (PointRoll, EyeWonder, Phulant, Sprout, Crisp Media, Gold Spot Media, PointReach and Celtra) and ad servers (DART and Atlas), to give agencies agencies the ability to create campaigns on partner publishers’ apps and sites. In conjunction with the announcement, John Breeman joined the firm as Chief Financial Officer. The company recently snagged Tony Nethercutt from Google owned-AdMob as its General Manager, North America. Mojiva faces competition from AdMob, Jumptap, Millennial and others. Jumptap also recently closed a $25 million round. The new funding will be used to expand internationally. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Quora, which is fresh of being one of the three chosen startups at Allen & Co conference, is adding the option to embed YouTube video in its answer pages, posts and question details this morning. The Q & A site recently redesigned in order to offer users a better way to search for content and this latest step is yet another in its effort to provide a better user experience. “It’s going to make answers on the site great — It opens the door to the kind of answers you can provide,” says Quora’s Mark Bodnick. As an example he brings up the “Which are the best storytelling songs?” page, which now has around 60 videos. If anything, it’s a good bet video will increase user time on site. YouTube video embedding on Quora will be retroactive, and all previous links will turn into embedded videos. Users will also be able to post multiple videos like in the example above and the site plans on adding other platforms like Vimeo soon. While the first instinct is to chalk up the addition of more media options to the fact that the site has picked up popularity with the celebrity set as of late, Bodnick tells me that in fact there are a range of topics that could be improved with video, and that users are already completing the behavior manually by adding links. While Bodnick did not disclose any Quora usership numbers, he did tell me that the site currently has over 60K topics. The feature will be inaugurated by answers that include video from New Jersey mayor Cory Booker and Muppet movie actor Jason Segel. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Geo-based marketing is just getting started, and local businesses are feeling their way around how best to use service like Foursquare, Facebook Places, Gowalla, and even Twitter.  It’s hard enough if you have only one store.  For chains and national retailers, managing Foursquare Specials across 400 stores is a nightmare.  MomentFeed is trying to bring some order and analytics to this chaos with a location-based marketing dashboard aimed at businesses with more than one location. The LA-based startup just raised a $1.2 million seed round from DFJ Frontier, DFJ JAIC, Factual founder Gil Elbaz,and Rapleaf founder Auren Hoffman, and Walter Kortschak. MomentFeed pulls in merchant location data from Foursquare, Facebook, Twitter, and Gowalla, and gives retailers a unified view of all the check-ins, deals, and specials across their locations nationwide.  (It is also built on Factual’s location data, which helps to harmonize locations between services).  With one dashboard, a retailer like 7-Eleven or a fast-food chain can see that maybe more people are checking in with Foursquare in New York, but with Facebook Places in the midwest and adjust their targeting accordingly.  “We are built on the place signal, instead of the keyword as the primary signal,” says CEO Rob Reed. The startup offers tiered services, from analytics to campaign management to CRM, which range in cost between $29 and $99 per year per location.  It is still not clear what merchants will be charged to run specials on Foursquare and other services, but Reed expects to share revenue with each location service.  “We are happy to share revenues with Foursquare and others for the data,” he says, “similar to Twitter with DataSift.”  (DatSift also raised money today in a $6 million series A).  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last Friday our own Alexia Tsotsis broke the news that digital loyalty card startup Punchd was being acquired by Google. The company is still very young but it’s a move that makes sense —  Punchd’s service, which lets customers accrue digital versions of those buy-10-get-1-free cards, could tie in well with Google’s payment products, like Google Wallet. Punchd responded to the article by tweeting that it had not been acquired. Now, three days later, they’re officially announcing that the six-person startup has indeed been acquired by Google and will be working from the search giant’s Mountain View headquarters going forward. The cause of the discrepancy: Punchd cofounder Reed Morse says that at the time of our post, the deal had not yet gone through, and that now it has. Okay. Anyway. Morse did share some other interesting tidbits, including the fact that the Punchd team isn’t simply being absorbed by Google to work on other projects — it’s going to continue working on Punchd full time, and that the service isn’t going anywhere. He also shared an interesting piece of Punchd’s history. The service got its start last year when Morse and cofounder Grantland Chew (who has since left the company) took a class at Cal Poly in San Luis Obispo that focused on Android development — a class that was made possible when Google donated two dozen G1 devices to the school. You can read an article about Punchd from the school newspaper here. Punchd was a member of the first batch of 500Startups companies. Latest headlines delivered to you daily About a year ago, Lost Decade Games, an early-stage game development startup based in Palo Alto, entered Boing Boing’s “Games Inspired By Music Contest”. The created a game called “Onslaught! Arena”, an addictive 16-bit-arcade-style, HTML5-only fantasy shoot ’em up. The game was popular enough that Google made it a launch title for the Chrome Web Store back in December. But, aside from aggressive downloading of Chrome Angry Birds (which is now unreachable for me on Chrome, by the way), sales haven’t exactly been outsized. As a result, Lost Decade Games Founders Geoff Blair and Matt Hackett were eager to go after the iOS market, but as the makers of an HTML5-only game, they were initially thwarted by the fact that HTML5 hasn’t really gotten up to speed (literally/figuratively) on mobile devices or tablets, thanks to a multitude of performance and audio issues. One of the attractions to building in HTML5, they said, is its portability, and they found it easy to move Onslaught! to the Mac App store for the desktop. But, HTML5 was, at least when they began, a bomb on the iPad, as they were only able to play one sound file at a time, experienced latency issues, and so on. While audio in HTML5 is not an easy beast to contend with in the first place, HTML5 has seen rapid developer adoption in recent months, and the technology is becoming more and more optimized every day, as support for emerging web technologies catches up on mobile and other devices. “HTML5 is the future of web content, and we intend to be on the ground floor when it comes to games”, Blair said. So, while Onslaught! on Chrome is great for playing the game on a desktop or laptop, the team would essentially have to rewrite their HTML5 game completely were they to optimize it for mobile, especially iOS. And as they are not exactly flush with cash from CWS sales, a time saver is critical. To solve their mobile woes, Lost Decade decided to partner with Game Closure, a startup we wrote about back in February, to become the first licensee of Game Closure’s mobile HTML5 engine. Using the startup’s technology, Lost Decade is today releasing a full-featured version of Onslaught! for iOS, without having to rewrite the game. According to Blair, the development time for launching on iOS was cut by 75 percent, and as a result, they will be able to launch a subsequent Android version next week. What’s more, they’ve been able to add some upgrades to the gameplay for the iOS release, including a much bigger playing area, four new environments, a new “Stage Select” screen to improve the game’s pacing and re-playability, a “Shop”, which features an HTML5 Shield, Speed Boots, Gold Armor, Whet Stone and more, and two types of controls. Back in May, Game Closure displayed its HTML5-based cross-platform multiplayer gaming technology at Google I/O, by way of “Popstar Defense”, a game created specifically for the conference to show that it is indeed possible to write a single HTML5 game that works across browsers, iOS, Android, tablets and all. Lost Decade is doing the same, and with Facebook’s “Project Spartan” on the way, reportedly to bring the social networking giant into the HTML5 game on mobile, developers like Lost Decade are well-positioned to do just that. Check out Onslaught! on iTunes here, and Game Closure here, and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily SHAPE Services, the company behind IM+ messaging applications, which allows users to connect to services as diverse as MSN, Yahoo!, Google Talk, AIM, Facebook, MySpace, Skype, and Twitter all from a single mobile app, is today launching a new app for iOS that brings aggregation to check ins. According to TC’s own Robin Wauters, SHAPE’s IM+ apps currently have about 12.5 million registered users, and the startup hopes to leverage its broad mobile user base and instant messaging clients with a similar approach to check-ins — only with a heavy dash of augmented reality (AR). CheckIn+ uses augmented reality technology to overlay a user’s current surroundings with places from select geolocation applications, allowing users to see each notable destination relative to its position in the real world, all as a live video image on their iPhone or iPad. As a user moves about with his or her device, they can see which places (like a subway or bus stop) are nearby and what distance they are from various points of interest. In the case of the iPhone, simply by holding the phone vertically, the app transforms a traditional map view into augmented reality. The main feature, though, is that the app gives users the ability to check-in on geolocation services like Foursquare and Facebook Places, allowing check-in to both services simultaneously with a single tap. With CheckIn+, users can discover cool local spots, and share highlights from bars, parks, venues, and more through a places search. Users can also add new places on Foursquare, and gather loyalty points and badges just as you normally would with the check-in service, as well as share photos of favorite places, view friends’ activity streams, see where they are in realtime, and leave comments for them on their streams. SHAPE Services CEO Igor Berezovsky told us that CheckIn+ will both be coming to Android phones and tablets and will be adding text and video chat features to the app in the near future. The app is currently available in two versions, one free and one paid. According to Berezovsky, CheckIn Pro (the paid version) will include the same features, but will be ad-free. For more of the visual experience of CheckIn+, check out the video below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily Vaporware Labs, a software company that makes social, mobile, and web apps, like Steve Young Football for the iPad and iPhone, and MEETorDIE, an an online tool that tells you how much money your company is wasting by having meetings and how it might be spending that money more productively. (You can read our coverage of MEETorDIE  here.) Today, Vaporware Labs is launching a new product called Commonred, which is putting a new spin on professional networking. Commonred wants to be the place you go to find a common link (the name is a shortening of “common thread”) with just about anyone — though they’ll need some user adoption to ensure that last bit. Essentially, the startup wants to take the cold call/email/approach out of the networking process. Or, another way of looking at it: Commonred is an attempt meld the meetup and “new people” discovery space, inhabited by startups like Sonar, Meetup, and LetsLunch, with professional networking sites/apps like Branchout and Hashable. Vaporware Labs, like many others, holds a monthly meetup (called Startup Grind) that allows entrepreneurs in Silicon Valley to meet each other, network, and share ideas. The motivation for Commonred was bred from these meetups and from the observation — that is endemic to all new meetup experiences — that giving entrepreneurs (and people in general) ways to more quickly find commonalities between themselves and the people they’re meeting leads to less awkwardness and a greater chance of building a strong(er) relationship. According to Vaporware and Commonred Founder Derek Andersen, Commonred is an attempt to “streamline the serendipity of finding someone that you went to the same high school with or someone that has also lived in, say, New Zealand”. Since much of our personal information is scattered across the social networks, “or lives on our blog or Plancast profile”, he says, when one wants to build a working relationship with someone, the process can be akin to a scavenger hunt. So, how does it work? Pretty simple. You connect all of your social profiles to Commonred, and the site takes your social graph data and builds a profile, taking a user’s social infrastructure and combining it with its own set of data. Commonred then presents its users with a snapshot of commonality they share with others — it’s not a fire hose of information, just the quick bullet points, like schools, places, hobbies, and companies, that help you quickly find things you have in common. You can compare your contacts to other individuals, which then appears in a tree-like view (which you can see to the right). In turn, this makes you slightly less (or more, depending on how you look at it) creepy when you approach someone or email someone in hopes of networking. Of course, the problem with this is that we all have a lot of collective contacts on Twitter, Facbook, LinkedIn, etc., but, in reality, we have 5 to 10 relationships that we value higher than the others — those people that we’d go to bat for in any circumstance. Commonred has created a “Board of Directors” feature that allows users to select their 10 most trusted (or most valued) contacts. This will not only allow other users to know how cool you are when Mark Zuckerberg shows up on your Board, but just another filter for finding commonality. Commonred is offering 200 free invites to TechCrunch readers, which can be accessed here. Check it out and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Exclusive – Fab.com, which started out as Fabulis, a social networking site for gay men, has not only recently changed its name but also started from scratch with an entirely new business centered around online flash sales of design items. We’ve learned that the startup has completed a $1 million early-stage round of funding from investor/actor Ashton Kutcher, SV Angel, SoftTech VC and previous backers First Round Capital, Baroda Ventures and The Washington Post. Jason Goldberg, serial entrepreneur and founder and chief executive of Fab.com, tells me that the recent change of course has turned out remarkably well for the company. Only 30 days after the launch of its online design-at-a-discount store, Fab.com has already generated $1.3 million in revenue and already has more cash flowing in than going out with a workforce of roughly 45 employees. A pivot to profitability, in other words. Since its June 9 debut, Fab.com boasts 300,000 members, with over 3.3 percent of them (10,000+) having made at least 1 purchase through the site, Goldberg claims. Currently, he adds, Fab.com members are purchasing 1,000 items per day on average. We hear the company is in the middle of closing yet another round of financing, this time in the ‘double-digits’ of millions range, to spur further growth. Latest headlines delivered to you daily We are a few years into the era of realtime data.  Everyone is producing and consuming it, but there is still a huge need to filter it. For that reason, Mark Suster of GRP Partners is doubling down on Twitter by investing in DataSift, one of two companies with rights to re-syndicate Twitter’s firehose of more than 200 million Tweets a day (the other one is Gnip).  GRP and IA Ventures are investing $6 million in DataSift in a Series A. DataSift was born out of Tweetmeme and launched at TechCrunch Disrupt SF last year.  It provides the full Twitter firehose in a way that can be mined, chopped up, analyzed, and mashed up with other realtime streams such as Klout, PeerIndex, Facebook, WordPress, and others. The bet that DataSift’s investors are making is that Twitter won’t enter this data syndication market itself and take it away like it did with Twitter clients.  DataSift has a long-term contract with Twitter, but that doesn’t guarantee Twitter won’t replicate any services it sees to be especially profitable.  On the other hand, if DataSift makes this work, it could become an acquisition target for Twitter. DataSift is trying to create the basis for a realtime data mining and business intelligence business.  It sees opportunities for products built on top of DataSift for financial services (realtime investing signals), marketing (sentiment analysis and influence trees), healthcare (looking for early signs of pandemics and other outbreaks), political campaigns (tracking voter sentiment), television (realtime feedback and social media monitoring), and news (breaking reports).  DataSift won’t build any of these products itself, but rather sell the data to others. If you want to see a fun little app built on top of DataSift, check out DataSift Invaders a Space Invaders game that shows a Twitter avatar every time somebody tweets @DSInvader.  It then shoots the avatars based o their Klout score. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Last week I quit email. It’s perhaps the smartest thing I’ve ever done. Instead of spending a couple hours every morning, a few hours before bed, and many cumulative hours in between on organizing, responding (and not responding) to endless messages, I’m doing things like reading, writing, and living life. I highly recommend that everyone try it. Of course, I realize that most people can’t. In fact, the reality is that I really can’t. My email quitting is merely an experiment for a few weeks that will provide plenty of good writing fodder. For stories like this, in fact. Shortly after I declared I was quitting email, numerous people pinged me about a service called Shortmail. While I had heard about it previously, thanks to this Fast Company article, I hadn’t tried it yet. So I signed up. And I immediately saw the appeal. At its most basic, Shortmail is a new front-end service for email with one very key feature: a 500-character limit for each message. Yes, it’s like Twitter for email. But it’s not just Twitter for email. There are other interesting elements of the service too. For example, you can set any Shortmail conversation to be private or public. The latter feature I tested out yesterday with 410 Labs (the company behind Shortmail) co-founder Dave Troy. Below, find my Q&A back and forth with him. (They don’t currently have embeds, so I took screen shots of it to include in this post. But you can find the thread live on the web here.) As Troy notes below, 410 Labs has secured a $750,000 Series A round of funding. True Ventures, 500 Startups, Fortify Ventures, and The Maryland Venture Fund drove the round. Individuals including Tim O’Shaughnessy (co-founder of LivingSocial), Jeff Ganek (founder of Neustar), Abdur Chowdhury (chief scientist at Twitter), among others, participated as well. So will I go with Shortmail when I come back to the land of email? It’s certainly a compelling option. Unlike other efforts such as three.sentenc.es (which we previously wrote about), Chris Anderson’s emailcharter.org, and AwayFind, Shortmail relies a bit more on force (you cannot send or receive a message over 500 characters) instead of self-policing or add-ons to existing email services. At the same time, it’s still a bridge since it works with current email protocols. We’ll see. I’m still of the mindset right now that the only way to fix email is to truly blow it up and start from scratch. But that’s obviously much easier said than done.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Online local media company Local.com this morning announced that it has acquired Screamin’ Media Group, the company behind Groupon clone daily deals site Screamin’ Daily Deals. Local.com paid $12.5 million in cash, stock and debt, with the opportunity for the shareholders of Screamin’ Media Group to earn up to an additional $20 million if certain – no doubt high-end – financial performance criteria are met during the two-year period following the closing of the transaction. Founded in early 2010, Screamin’ Daily Deals has approximately 60 employees serving “hundreds of thousands” of subscribers with deals from local merchants across 14 markets all over the United States. The company also recently launched travel deals. The startup is said to have generated – unaudited – revenues of approximately $2.4 million in 2010 and $4.4 million during the first half of 2011. Screamin’ Media Group will relocate to Local.com’s corporate headquarters in Irvine, California, where it will be absorbed by the latter’s group buying business unit Spreebird. The startup’s three co-founders, formerly president, CEO and COO, will become Spreebird’s vice presidents of sales and marketing, product and operations, respectively. Local.com just entered a two-year agreement with Google to implement “certain advertising and search services,” according to a recent filing to the SEC, causing shares to jump. Also read: Local.com Buys Local Search Company Krillion For $3.5M, Debuts Daily Deal Service Local.com Aims To Raise $15.5 Million In Public Offering Local.com Buys Domain Advertising Company OCTANE360 For Up To $11M Latest headlines delivered to you daily The Allen and Co. conference at the Sun Valley Resort in Idaho is a peculiar beast. Press aren’t allowed to attend or cover any of the panels and aren’t allowed in the storied Duchin bar. In addition, attendees are not allowed to talk to the press about the content of any of the meetings which makes for some interesting adventures in reporting. Still, despite restrictions, attendance is totally worthwhile; After all it’s the place where mythical investor Warren Buffett rubs elbows with Zynga founder Mark Pincus rubs elbows with actress Salma Hayek rubs elbows with Groupon CEO Andrew Mason rubs elbows with fashion designer Diane von Fürstenberg rubs elbows with Facebook investor Peter Thiel and so forth. And, more importantly, the wall of curtly congenial yet ultimately deflective PR people is nowhere to be found. For journalists hungry enough, it’s paradise. The conference has been primarily media focused since the 1982, and only last year did the tech to media mogul ratio achieve parity. As an example of its commitment to all things Internet, Allen & Co investment bank throws another more tech-focused conference in Arizona early in the year. It’s amazing when the people who are doing new things (and that you’re used to covering day in and day out) are literally put on the same podium as Oprah. The big draw this year was Bill Gates interviewing Mark Zuckerberg, and it was rumored that the talk show queen herself had changed her flight in order to catch the before-noon panel on Saturday morning. According to friend Gayle King she ended up missing the panel after all. It’s probably a good thing. From what I heard, Zuckerberg and Gates didn’t say anything particularly newsworthy, with Zuckberg dropping talking points about Facebook’s success and its user to engineer ratio (750 million users divided by 2,000+ employees) and his curious Law of Social Sharing. The highlight of the talk for one attendee (which consisted of questions along the lines of  “Do you like being CEO of Facebook?) was when Gates joked that Allen and Co. had brought together two of the best interviewers and then paused, “Oprah and Charlie Rose.” What’s more interesting is that the investment bank has taken to inviting small startups to present at panels. Last year it was Square, Groupon, Pandora and oddly enough, the somewhat mysterious startup ThingD. This year it was Dropbox, Quora and Airbnb. So why those three? Well Allen and Co. is an underwriter focused on building relationships with particularly lucrative clients and is seeking out the most promising of the Silicon Valley brood in order to whet the tech sector appetites of investor attendees and secure further business as the companies grow (Allen and Co. is said to be an advisor in Groupon’s upcoming IPO and is an investor in Pandora). All three also presented at Allen and Co.’s Arizona conference in March. The triumvirate gave their talks on Saturday morning, with 15-minute presentations of their products; CEOs Adam D ‘Angelo and Brian Chesky presented examples of Quora questions and Airbnb listings and Drew Houston gave an overview of Dropbox. “Most people at the conference didn’t know what any of the products were,” said one participant. While all three CEOs declined to give comment on why they thought they were chosen this year.  (None of them have the “Forget You” money of Eric Schmidt, who unabashedly talked to reporters for a crazy 70 minutes on Thursday) one investor had a theory, “Airbnb is printing money. They operate more rooms in Manhattan than all the [big] hotels combined.” The same investor theorized that Quora’s invitation was due to the Facebook effect (Zuck essentially gave the keynote) and the fact that it has done a great job of giving people a venue to expand upon their online reputations. Dropbox has earned its place in the Sun Valley sun because the fact that it was one of the first champions of the cloud in addition to its impressive usership numbers – which makes it a prime acquisition target (and potential Allen & Co client). In terms of where they stand regarding financing, Airbnb is about to officially announce raising $100 million at a $1 billion dollar valuation, Quora has a modest $11 million in funding (and is said to be raising more) and Dropbox is basically turning away term sheets, I’ve heard. But even a 15-minute time slot on an agenda that includes King Abdullah of Jordan and New Jersey governor (and Republican Presidential hopeful) Chris Christie is huge; For the Sun Valley startups it means that that they get to pitch in front of idols Bill Gates, Mark Pincus and Mark Zuckerberg. But the benefits go both ways. Rumor has it that Dropbox was swarmed by potential investors at a BBQ during the conference’s first night. Allen and Co. obviously doesn’t share what criteria it uses to invite startups (which it does, quaintly enough through snail mail) but common sense holds that it’s probably what it thinks would be a good bet (and return). My predictions for next year’s invite list: Instagram, Uber and Spotify. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Those media experts among us may be familiar with “Help A Reporter Out”, or HARO, which brings reporters and bloggers to quotable sources, and helps small businesses promote their brands. It’s an interesting, if not completely proven, model. Now, what if you apply that model to startups, and the startup hiring process? This was Tolu Babalola’s thinking when he created College2Startup, a resource for startups looking to find quality collegiate or postgraduate talent. Startups are always looking for talent, and it’s not unusual to see established companies acqu-hire a startup just to get access its talent. In fact, Mark Zuckerberg is making a company out of it. But, that being said, it’s no easy feat to find talent that is the right fit for your startup, especially with all the white noise coming out of sites like CareerBuilder, Monster, and Craigslist. In creating College2Startup, Babalola did some quick surveys of those currently employed at startups and found that nearly two-thirds of them were hired based on referrals by friends, former colleagues, etc. It would stand to reason, then, that it can be pretty difficult for undergraduates and recent graduates to find openings at startups if they don’t happen to know someone who’s already inside. Thus, College2Startup allows prospective employees to subscribe to a daily newsletter (that Babalola curates) to receive job opportunities. College2Startup’s daily newsletter is opt-in and meant to target only those that have job-specific talent. When a prospective employee receives the newsletter, he or she can scroll through the list of job openings to find the opportunity that best suits them, and click to apply right from the newsletter. And, once a user has signed up, they can filter results from jobs listings as well. Of course, the model may not sound particularly mind-blowing, as sites like Mediabistro (and many others) offer the ability to get tailored email alerts for the types of jobs you’re looking for, and you can apply straight from those emails. So, while opt-in and apply-straight-from-an-email are cool features, the founder says that what distinguishes College2Startup is in how it treats the application process. The questions that companies ask prospective employees on the big job sites tend to be generic, and they don’t do a great job of finding out what the applicant’s specific skills are. Babalola said that he wants to get the interview process rolling right from the first application, which is why candidates are asked questions about their specific skill sets. Once the user has clicked the “apply to” link in the email, for example, they are taken to an application page in which Babalola has arranged a series of questions he knows startups will be eager to see the answers to, before calling the applicant in for the interview. If the job is for a backend developer at Groupon, for instance, candidates will be asked questions like, “What languages do you code in?”, or asked to talk about (and provide links to) sites they’ve built in the past, links to their GitHub profile, or even provide a video introduction. Babalola said that he thinks sending the answers to these questions directly to startups can help streamline the process and get the ball rolling faster, so that startups have a relevant sneak-peek at prospectives before interviewing. It also helps limit the often labyrinthine application process inherent to larger sites. But the big goal with College2Startups, the founder reiterated, is to target a younger crowd that is desperate to work at a startup but may not yet have connections or people to refer them. While this may sound silly or even alien to talent in Silicon Valley, outside of the Bay Area, things aren’t quite so easy. “When I graduated”, Babalola said, “I looked for startup jobs everywhere and really struggled to find for 6 months before a friend referred me to a friend who knew someone. The same is true in my local Baltimore startup meetups. There is a lot of promising talent that doesn’t know where to find startup jobs”. While I’m all in favor of resources targeting startups specifically and young talent that might go undiscovered otherwise, a potential drawback to College2Startups is that it charges $100 to startups that want to post a job on the site. InternMatch, which we wrote about back in April, charges a similar fee, while Internship.com is free and Urban interns charges $40. Yes, College2Startup is targeting real jobs, and not internships, but startups aren’t always flush with cash — every penny counts. Another somewhat comparable and cool service to check out is RescueTime Introductions, which is like a CarFax for job candidates, and also targets startups and the tech industry. (In fact, College2Startups may be more similar in conception to Jobby, which the RescueTime guys sold to Jobster in 2006.) College2Startups is obviously still in the very early stages, though it has racked up over 3,200 subscribers in lead up to the first newsletter, which went out last week. Check it out, and let us know what you think. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Daily deal sites, by and large, seem like they’re here to stay, much to Rocky Agrawal’s chagrin, surely. Whether or not you agree with Rocky’s flurry of posts last month about Groupon and its claque of clones, the daily deals model is not perfect, and it’s certainly a worthy endeavor to make sure that small businesses and merchants are not coerced into structuring one-sided relationships with daily deals sites. Justin Cener, the Founder and CEO of Crowd Seats, agrees that the daily deal model is not ideal for every industry and merchants shouldn’t force the model just because daily deals are all the rage these days. That being said, Cener thinks he’s found a niche that is suited well to the daily deal and group buying model: Sports tickets. The Crowd Seats founder told me that he thinks businesses with perishable inventory stand to gain the most from the daily deals model and that sports tickets are a prime example: If tickets to Sunday afternoon’s football game go unsold, those particular tickets can’t just be sold on Monday. Those tickets are lost. For good. What’s more, businesses that make money on complementary goods and can create purchases that make up for the money lost in the discount stand to do more than just break even on these kind of deals. Generally speaking, when a discount comes out to be 75 percent or more, it’s a losing proposition for the merchant — depending of course on the deal provider’s cut. The daily deal model can be successful in niche markets, Cener said, because in the case of sports tickets (and, really, any other ticket-selling business — movie theaters would be another), there can be “guaranteed overage” revenue generated from complementary sources, like parking, concessions, beer, souvenirs, and so on. The niche focus is also a leg up for Crowd Seats (especially in the face of the Groupon haters out there). When a user signs up for the startup’s service, they are signing up to buy sports tickets — and sports tickets only — compared to Groupon, where a user might be interested in massage deals, or restaurant deals, or movie deals. Targeting a niche market can also address the issue of long-term value; Groupon deals are becoming famously questionable as a means for creating loyal customers, but in a niche market, Cener thinks that sports fans are already rabid by nature. They’re also going to be encouraged to become repeat visitors, because they want to support their teams and get to as many games as possible, especially when they can take advantage of highly discounted deals. (Rates are negotiated on a game by game basis, and normally range from 30-45% of the total deal revenue, Cener said.) Another point: Daily deals sites don’t do a great job of conveying extra value to the merchants they partner with, which is why Cener hopes that by including social media links to teams’ Facebook and Twitter pages, and encouraging its users to “like” and “follow”, teams can connect with their fans on their own terms. Crowd Seats also provides “best practices” for merchants, offering teams advice on how to retain new customers, like encouraging them to sign up for an email list, or including marketing materials and flyers at the point of voucher exchange, or even welcoming Crowd Seats users via Jumbotron signage. The Los Angeles-based startup, which initially launched last month, offers discounts between 50 and 90 percent off the face value of sports tickets. At this point, the service is available in Los Angeles, San Francisco, New York, Chicago, and Boston, but Cener says that he wants to continue expanding to all major cities in the U.S. As to how it works? Users sign up for Crowd Seats and confirm by email, whereupon they can the search for deals by city. Once a user chooses one of Crowd Seats’ deals, they enter billing information in a secure checkout and submit the order. They’ll then be redirected to their profile, or “My Stuff” page, which lists a user’s purchases and account information. Crowd Seats then sends the user an email, where they can view and print their tickets. Fairly straightforward. Crowd Seats has not yet received any outside funding, it’s completely early-stage bootstrapping at this point, but Cener said he hopes to being raising a round of seed funding once the model gets some traction. It’s going to be tough for Crowd Seats in the early going, because of the deep resources of sites like StubHub, users will quickly become disenchanted when they find that their favorite sports team isn’t yet on board, offering deals. But Crowd Seats seems to have picked a great niche market in which to leverage the daily deals model, and if the team can forge some early partnerships with big sports franchises, the startup could be headed for long-term viability. Check it out and let us know what you think. Oh, and Cener also did some due diligence and research on early daily deal experiments among sports teams, and found that revenue from ticket sales plus supplemental revenue generated at the stadium averaged out to over $50K per deal — at least for those NBA teams that tried out daily deals. You’ll find more in the infographic below:  Latest headlines delivered to you daily While the historical accuracy of Facebook tell-all The Social Network was questionable, the movie did tremendously well at the box office. And at the Golden Globe Awards and the Oscars. Now Hollywood producers are looking for the next big story around a tech company. Next up—Justin.TV. LA-based production company Riche Productions has bought the rights to the story behind the development and founding of live video streaming startup Justin.TV. For background, the startup was founded by Justin Kan, Michael Seibel, Kyle Vogt and Emmett Shear, who were all buddies from college (Vogt went to MIT, the others graduated from Yale). Prior to starting Justin.TV Kan and Shear founded an online calendar program Kiko, and even got funding from Y Combinator. Unfortunately the product failed and the pair sold the business on eBay for around $250,000. Justin.TV got its start back in 2007 as Kan livecasted his life with a camera hooked up to a backpack that was loaded with batteries and modems, letting thousands of viewers watch his every move. It was basically the beginning of the live stream era. Even the Today Show took notice of Kan’s stunt . Flash forwards four years, the Y Combinator-backed company has become one of the most popular live streaming platforms on the web. And Justin.TV has spawned a few businesses, including an Instagram for video, Socialcam, and a live-streamed gaming portal. You can watch our TC Cribs feature on Justin.TV’s office here. So why did Riche Productions, which has produced Starsky and Hutch, Family Man, Bride Wars, and many other blockbuster movies, choose to buy the rights to the story of Justin.TV out of the thousands of other successful tech startups that have been launched by college kids? Peter Riche tells us in an exclusive interview that compared to some of the previous movies that have profiled tech startups (i.e. The Social Network), he wanted to find a story where success in the entrepreneurial tech world has helped bring founder friendships closer (as opposed to spurring lawsuits). It’s true—despite the complications of founding a startup, and dealing with all of the challenges that fledgling businesses face in the tech space; Kan, Seibel, Vogt and Shear all remain close friends. And all are still actively a part of the company and involved in its day-today activities and development. Riche says he still isn’t sure what will make sense for Justin.TV in terms of the format of a piece; and his company is evaluating whether a movie or TV show make sense. While it’s impressive that the Justin.TV guys have been able to grow their friendship despite being on the roller coaster of creating and sustaining a startup, I have to wonder whether this would make a movie that would have the same appeal as The Social Network. I’m no filmmaker or screenwriter, but drama and conflict does seem important in developing a quality, dimensional film. As my colleague Alexia Tsotsis wrote in her initial review of The Social Network, the movie was built around heavily dramatized controversy and the exposure of the cold, calculating (and fictional) Mark Zuckerberg. Despite the fact that Aaron Sorkin’s adaptation of the story included inaccuracies and fictional story lines, the drama, ruthless characters and arrogance were all part of what made the movie so fascinating to the mainstream public. On the other hand, considering Riche’s experience in producing comedies, a comedic movie or TV adaptation of Justin.TV’s story could be interesting. Would you watch a TV show or movie based around the Justin.TV story? Latest headlines delivered to you daily How much is social worth to Google?  Investors added $20 billion to Google’s market cap the first week after the launch of Google+ on June 28.  A Morgan Stanley downgrade on Friday, brought the total down to $15.8 billion because of doubts whether Google will indeed be able to capitalize on new products such as Google+.  But somewhere in between there, give or take a few billion, is how much more the market thinks Google is worth than before the launch of Google+. On June 27 (the day before the announcement), the stock closed at $482.80.  It rose to a high of $546.60 on July 7, for a $20.6 billion gain to its market cap (with 322.25 million shares outstanding).  Then the stock dropped to $532 at Friday’s close. Of course there are other factors at play here (the health of Google’s core search business, the overall market, etc.).  In the past week, however, the most important new event for Google was it’s latest foray into social.  And even though Google+ is still in a limited beta, the market is already rewarding the serious focus on social that it represents. Bravo, Larry Page.  If he can deliver on the promise of social, Morgan Stanley will be tripping over itself to upgrade the stock.  Anyone want to guess what will happen to Google’s market cap between now and then? Latest headlines delivered to you daily I happened to be watching my new favorite show, Bravo’s Million Dollar Decorators, last week and noticed a very familiar name. The show, which follows five LA-based, high-end interior designers in their industry, prominently featured One Kings Lane, the Kleiner Perkins and Greylock-backed flash sales site for home décor, furnishings and accessories. In an episode that aired a few weeks ago, One Kings Lane was co-hosting a party with one of the decorators, Nathan Turner, to celebrate a new curated sale from Turner featuring hand-picked furniture and accessories from India. The site actually got a ton of air time, and even featured co-founder Susan Feldman (pictured in the post with Turner). The Turner-curated sale on One Kings Lane (which featured the Bravo endorsement) started the following morning after the episode aired and One Kings Lane saw most items sold out within minutes. This past week’s episode again featured One Kings Lane as part of the story line, with celebrity designer Martyn Lawrence Bullard accompanying Feldman and another One Kings Lane employee to London to pick out items for a similar curated sale. One Kings Lane got much more air time in this past episode, and when the sale hit the next morning, the event was 96 percent sold out 3 hours into the start of the Bullard-London sale. And Wednesday was all time high for daily new member acquisitions, thanks  to the feature on the show. A Bravo endorsement is a big deal for the flash sales site, considering the channel is seeing record viewership among adults ages 18 to 49. Feldman tells us that the site was originally doing a Tastemaker Tag sale with Turner last year, and One Kings Lane actually took a TV crew with them to film the journey in the effort of pitching Bravo with the idea to use the flash sales site in the reality TV show. Upon return, Feldman says Bravo ended promoting the startup in the show because of the strategic fit. Nowadays, broadcast is traditionally not thought of as a “direct action” marketing channel for web startups. But this example with One Kings Lane and Bravo (who has also featured partnerships with Foursquare and Shazam) demonstrates the power of connecting broadcast to next generation commerce, such as the flash sales model. One Kings Lane has proven that a niche commerce model can not only draw a large userbase (the company is nearing 2 million users, says Feldman), but see revenue growth as well. The startup grew revenue over 500 percent from 2009 to 2010. In this Wall Street Journal interview, One Kings Lane CEO Doug Mack says that he expects to continue this growth (by “hundreds of percent”) this year as well. And more than 75 percent of sales come from repeat customers (I happen to fall into this category). The truth of the matter is that commerce is evolving and promotional deals with networks, technology companies and other content providers is just one way in which flash sales sites are innovating. Gilt has been combining editorial with commerce in its foodie site Gilt Taste as well as in its Home And Furniture vertical. And Gilt just launched an interesting deal with in-flight WiFi company Gogo Wireless to offer exclusive in-air deals and free access on the flash sales site. Celebrity partnerships are another way that flash sales sites are trying to draw business and engage with users. One Kings Lane featured a deal with actress Gwyneth Paltrow to promote her new cookbook and held and event in New York in her honor as well. Gilt and Lady Gaga teamed up for a curates dale featuring Gaga-inspired merchandise, access to Gaga events and more. Feldman explains that not every celebrity or broadcast partnership is the right one. It’s important to make sure the brands fit, she explains, “where there is good synergy, there’s a win-win for everyone.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily When Mixed Media Labs raised a $5 million round last November, it raised quite a few eyebrows. After all, the money came from Andreessen Horowitz, the VC firm which had backed Instagram. To be fair, they backed Instagram when it was still known as Burbn — before it became what is now a massively popular mobile photo-sharing app. Still, there’s no question that Mixed Media Labs’ PicPlz product was a direct competitor. And Andreessen Horowitz sided with them, while Instagram found other investors. But as Sarah noted at the time, Andreessen’s bet wasn’t so much against Instagram, as it was a bet on Mixed Media Lab founder Dalton Caldwell. Caldwell, who had previously founded imeem, was said to have a broad vision for a company beyond photo-sharing. PicPlz was just the first product to leverage what they were creating. And while it has achieved moderate success, it has not seen the success Instagram has in terms of users. And now Mixed Media Labs has moved on to their next product, we’ve learned. Specifically, PicPlz has been spun off as a separate company that will be run by Ali Aydar, a former executive at Napster, imeem, and yes, Mixed Media Labs. We had been hearing for weeks that PicPlz was being shopped around for potential cash deals as Mixed Media Labs sought to focus on what’s next. But ultimately, they decided to simply spin off PicPlz as a separate company while maintaining some ownership. Reached for comment, Caldwell confirmed the PicPlz spin-off, but declined to discuss the deal further beyond expressing his excitement about what his team is working on next. So what is Mixed Media Labs working on next? All we know for sure is that it’s inline with the initial goal of a broad idea in the app space. Specifically, we’ve also heard that there will be a strong focus on a business model from day one, unlike PicPlz. Meanwhile, PicPlz will live on as a service, but Caldwell and the rest of the Mixed Media Labs team will not be involved any more. The move away from PicPlz comes at an interesting time in the mobile photo sharing space. While Instagram continues to gain users rapidly, other players like Path and Color have been preparing other products as well. Path recently launched their first “joint” — hipster/Dr. Dre lingo for “side project” — With. Color Labs, meanwhile, is said to be preparing an entirely new app after Color failed to catch on in the way they had hoped. Latest headlines delivered to you daily When we think of scientists, we often picture distinguished researchers in white coats, methodically conducting experiments in labs that run like well-oiled machines. Unfortunately things are usually less glamorous. Science labs have a lot going on, and while they’re generally very focused on making sure safety protocols are followed and contamination is minimized, there are some things that are a little less organized. Like ordering supplies — oftentimes reagents are either ordered in excess (resulting in waste) or forgotten about until they’re needed (resulting in delays). Quartzy, a startup that’s part of the most recent Y Combinator batch, is setting out to fix that problem. The company launched around 18 months ago and has 4,500 scientists worldwide using the service — and there are plenty more who could use help keeping their supplies in check, many of whom are spending thousands of dollars on supplies every year. At first glance, the service seems a bit like a science social network. You sign in and create a profile, then link up with your coworkers and other colleagues. But founder Adam Regelmann explains that the site isn’t really about connecting with your colleagues in a social sense — rather, it’s about keeping track of which supplies your lab has in stock, and what needs to be ordered . He adds that it’s a problem he’s faced himself as a MD and PhD from Columbia, which is when he had the idea for the company. Anyone in your lab can log in to see the current inventory status, which helps make sure that they don’t place order requests for things that they don’t need. The site also lists expiration dates, which is important for reagents that only last for a relatively brief amount of time (like some enzymes). Inputting the inventory information into the system is something each lab will need to do themselves — there’s currently no direct integration with vendors, so your inventory won’t automatically be updated each time you order more supplies. Regelmann says this is partially because the industry is very fragmented, so labs are oftentimes ordering their supplies from many different vendors (some of which use arcane technology) which makes integrations difficult. Update: Regelmann adds that while the service doesn’t tie in directly with these vendors, Quartzy does allow labs to upload their existing inventory Excel spreadsheets to quickly get their labs up and running on the service. And Quartzy also includes online versions of each supplier catalog, so you can quickly add supplies to your database by keying in vendor names and catalog numbers — the system will automatically populate the rest of the information. Quartzy does more than keep track of your lab supplies. It’s also building out a review database for supplies commonly used in laboratories (you can rate how effective a given enzyme was, for example). At this point the database is fairly small, with around 1,000 reviews, but it’s an idea that has potential. Also very cool: Quartzy has a feature that’s the scientist equivalent of asking your neighbor for a cup of sugar. It’s quite common in scientific communities for researchers to ask friends and colleagues in other, nearby laboratories for a certain reagent that they only need a small amount of (Regelmann says he’d get five or so such requests per week during his research days). Quartzy helps with this by letting users run a proximity-based query that lets them see if anyone in their city happens to have what they need. And it’s smart about doing this — any results you see will be anonymized. You can send a message to the anonymous researcher and ask if they can spare a dash of whatever you need (they’ll be able to see who you are), and if they’re interested they’ll respond. So how does Quartzy make money? So far Regelmann says that the company is focused entirely on growth. Down the line it will let science supply vendors purchase advertising on the site, giving a very targeted channel directed toward a group of people who are typically hard to reach (he explains that many vendors often have time informing scientists about new products). And scientists will get exposed to new products they might not have otherwise known about, so it stands to be a win-win situation. Quartzy’s team currently includes three programmers in addition to founders Regelmann and  Jayant Kulkarni. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Wood-burning stoves aren’t known for being particularly efficient, and their smoke not only contains high carbon emissions but causes health risks to those who inhale it. A portable design from BioLite aims to tackle this problem and turn the stove into a cell phone charger in the process. The stove converts heat energy into electricity, powering a small fan to improve the wood’s combustion. Beyond this, one to two watts are available to charge a cell phone or LED light via a USB port. The company sees two markets for their stove: Families in developing countries, and avid backpackers and campers. BioLite will release the CampStove version first, in spring of 2012. They hope profits from this product will help subsidize the cost of the HomeStove model for families in developing countries.   BioLite claims to require half the amount of wood as an open fire and to cut smoke emissions by as much as 95%. Because billions of people depend on wood as cooking fuel, the stove has potential to improve health and, perhaps, slightly curb deforestation. The CampStove model weighs just under two pounds and boils a liter of water in less than four minutes. A variety of materials can be used to power it, including sticks, pine cones, dung, rice husks and underbrush. This could be convenient for campers tired of carrying cans of gas or petroleum to power their stoves. BioLite has already won awards for its designs, including the St. Andrews Prize for the Environment and first place in the 2010 Sustainable Brands Innovation Open. BioLite’s COO Jonathan den Hartog explains how the stove works: Here’s the CampStove in action: Latest headlines delivered to you daily We’ve just gotten word that that Google plans on acquiring digital loyalty card service Punchd. The team, which consists of developers Reed Morse, Xander Pollock and Niket Desai (and formerly Grantland Chew), will most likely still be working on Punchd within Google according to our source. While our original source pegged the deal at a low seven figures, a second source pegged the acquisition price at more than $10 million. Punchd, which is basically the digital equivalent of the “Buy 10 Get One Free Card” offered by coffee shops and supermarkets, is part of Dave McClure’s first 500 Startups brood. The acquisition makes complete sense for Google considering how much the NFC and deals space is heating up and the recent Google Wallet announcement. It’s been a great week for 500 Startups, which has now sold a company to Twitter (BackType), LinkedIn (CardMunch) and Google. Punchd itself actually made our list of  “The Seven Most Interesting Startups At 500 Startups Demo Day” back in April (Guess Google agreed). Fun fact: The company were accepted to the 500 Startups brood of “little monsters” after they “Iced” McClure. Update: Punchd denies that it’s been acquired. @elspoono Yup. Pay close attention to the words "To Buy" in my headline. cc: @punchd @TechCrunch — Alexia Tsotsis (@alexia) July 9, 2011  Latest headlines delivered to you daily It’s a well known fact that people improve foreign language skills when interacting and communicating with other people who speak the same foreign language. Y Combinator-backed Verbling is launching today as a easy to use online conversation exchange for language learners, leveraging in-browser video chat. The site allows you to sign up and choose the language you want to learn. Since the site doesn’t have a massive userbase just yet, Verbling hosts sessions as specific times daily (12 pm PT and 7 pm PT) where people can show up and chat with each other. Once you join the site during a session time, you are automatically paired with a language speaker who is fluent in the language you wish to learn. The site encourages users to talk to a number of different speakers within each session. So if you speak French and want to learn English, you’ll be paired up with a native English speaker who wants to learn French. You start in one language and halfway through the video session, a timer tells you when to switch to the other. Speakers are also matched by their language levels, and to aid in the conversation, Verbling will suggest topics according to the ability of the participants, such as “What chores are you responsible for in your home” or “what kind of music do you listen to?” The chats are conducted via video chat, but the startup doesn’t seem to be too worried about any Chatroulette-like issues because everyone has to register with their name and other personal info to use the service. Currently, Verbling is using Flash for the video streaming itself, but the startup has built significant infrastructure around the player to ensure that the audio video quality is as good as possible, even when faced with varying internet connection quality. The site soft launched this past week and already has 1,500 signups. So far, native Spanish speakers who are looking to learn English have dominated the sign-ups. There are a number of startups competing in the online language learning space including Live Mocha, Busuu, and Voxy. But crowdsourcing and matching people up based on their skill level and interest makes sense in terms of adding another layer to language education.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily There’s no shortage of food recipe sites on the web for virtually any kind of food. In fact, trying to find a recipe online can be overwhelming with all of the options available. Enter recently launched foodie favorite Gojee, which curates recipes from food bloggers around the web in a visually beautiful way. On Gojee, you can search for recipes by ingredient, either via ‘cravings’ or by one ingredient you have in your pantry. You can also input your dislikes or allergies and Gojee will make sure to surface recipes without these ingredients. So say I had leftover snowpeas in my pantry, I can enter that query and Gojee will show me all the recipes that include that ingredient from the many food blogs it curates data from. The site presents a beautiful image of the food along with a list of what else is included in the dish, a short description of the dish, and a link to the full recipe on the food blog. You can also star the recipe to save it to your favorites. Besides the fact that all the recipes look absolutely delicious, one of the things that makes Gojee compelling is the photography and imagery that accompanies each recipe. These photos, which are taken by the food bloggers themselves, make you want to eat and create each dish. The startup has even caught the eye of celebrity chef Marcus Samuelsson. Gojee is also attempting to make your life easier by allowing you to import your rewards card info from your grocery store of choice, and the site will give you recipes based on the items you have purchased. Unfortunately, the feature is only integrated with New York grocery store chain D’Agostino but the startup hopes to add more stores in the near future. The end goal for Gojee, says founder Michael Lavalle, is to offer a more curated, personalized experience for finding recipes on the web. Currently the site has under 50,000 recipes, but is focused on adding quality recipes vs. quantity. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Silicon Valley loves to dismiss Asian companies as nothing more than copycats who thrive, particularly in China, because the government protects them and punishes Western competitors. Even when the businesses in question are dramatically different in practice and scale, they are described as the “eBay of China”, “The Google of China” and “the YouTube of China,” not Alibaba, Baidu and YouKu. I’ve argued why this is mostly nonsense before. But the starkest argument that Asia does indeed innovate may be found in the world of free-to-play games and virtual goods. This is a new market we’re in a lather about here with the impending $1 billion IPO of Zynga, but one that is much larger and more than ten years old in Asia. And one of the industry’s pioneers, Nexon, is also said to be readying itself for an IPO. Nexon was started in Korea, but more recently moved its headquarters to Tokyo. And get this: It has higher revenues, far better margins and dramatically better user engagement statistics than Zynga, even if most average Western investors have never heard of it. No big deal, because it’s likely to file somewhere in Asia according to sources familiar with the matter, not on the NYSE or the Nasdaq. And in Korea, China and Japan, Nexon most definitely doesn’t have the problem of being unknown. Nexon is a 17-year-old company with 1.14 billion cumulative registered users and 3000 employees. In 2009, it reported revenues of $643 million– just north of Zynga’s 2010 revenues. And we hear from people close to the company, Nexon has been growing revenues at about 30% per year for the last five years. That would put 2010 revenues around $900 million, and revenues in 2011 on pace to comfortably break $1 billion. That’s impressive growth considering Nexon’s size, age and penetration in its home market, and it means Nexon’s revenue-per-employee is almost double Zynga’s. What’s more: Nexon’s margins are far better than Zynga’s because they don’t have to pay the 30% Facebook Credits fee on purchases. Our source says the margins are in the range of their largest competitor, Chinese juggernaut Tencent which had 50% margins in 2010. Increased tax and marketing expenses caused margins to fall to 46.3% in its March 2011 earnings report. Still, for what’s essentially a media business, those margins are pretty enviable. And like Tencent, Nexon is starting to eye North America and Western Europe for growth. Nexon’s biggest market is in Korea, closely followed by its business in China. But its fastest growing market is North America. Nexon is growing more than 50% a year here, albeit off a pretty small base. Nine days ago it launched a private beta on its first Facebook game, a version of its popular MapleStory Adventures. (Featuring that world-weary pig above.) Some 31,000 players have “purchased” 363,000 items over that period. Purchase is in quote marks because the company isn’t actually using Facebook Credits during the beta period, so the purchases are being made from game play points. Actual monetary purchases will almost certainly be less. Still, it gives you an idea of the engagement going on. The game opens to the public July 27. Recently I talked to Nexon CFO Owen Mahoney about the North America strategy. He wouldn’t comment- or even hint about- the IPO speculation, Nexon’s revenues, growth or margins, but he had some interesting color on Nexon’s push into the US. The driver isn’t so much Zynga’s success, although the company has done an exemplary job of evangelizing the free-to-play, virtual goods model. The biggest driver is that North America and Western Europe are finally reaching critical mass of broadband needed to support Nexon’s traditional graphics-rich games. Yep, when you are a Korean-born gaming company, we are considered an infrastructure and technology backwater that’s just now starting to look interesting. For the last few years that Mahoney has been working between the US and Asia, it’s been a surreal experience, with the US considering virtual goods an absurd business model, and Asia considering console games selling in boxes on store shelves just as absurd. The journey has been all the more surreal, because Mahoney spent nine years as an executive at EA. There’s no dying EA equivalent in Asia, because that model was largely leap-frogged over a decade ago as companies like Tencent, Nexon, Shanda, Giant and others started to soar on the free-to-play model. Even subscription-based gaming models have long been out of vogue. “For two years we couldn’t talk to anyone in North America about microtransactions. It was this weird disconnect because Asian markets couldn’t understand why you would ever go to BestBuy and buy a box. It seemed insane. That’s much less the case now,” Mahoney says. That disconnect is core to how the social Web and the Web in general has evolved in Asia. In the US, the Internet started with email, commerce, transactions and finding information. It was all about convenience and efficiency, and it’s only in the last five-to-ten years that entertainment-for-entertainment-sake has started to become a huge business online. In Asia, it’s largely the opposite. Put another way, social networks emerged because of gaming in Asia, not as an after-thought add on. And that’s benefitted the big Asian game makers who don’t have to pay the 30% customer acquisition costs to a platform like Facebook or Apple. (Although clearly, Nexon is swallowing those terms to expand more broadly in the US.) The Nexon game and type of gamer is still pretty distinct from Zynga’s casual Farmville farmer. While Zynga excels at games that continually rope you in for short periods of time and develop new versions of its games to keep people engaged, the life of a Nexon gamer playing a single game is measured in long sessions over months and years. A whopping one-third of its users have played for three years or more and play for tens of hours a month. So you could argue just as big Chinese Web 1.0 giants were never true copy-cats of Valley companies, so too has Zynga iterated and “localized” the free-to-play model. Of course since Asian gaming companies have the five-to-ten year headstart, it’s their turn to be the giant foreign Web company tapping a new market– in this case, the US. In addition to Nexon, Tencent has been wading in as quietly as it can, doing one big acquisition of Riot Games in February and dozens of smaller, unreported acquisitions over the last year or more. It’ll be interesting to watch whether the Asian Web companies coming to the US have a better track record than we had going to Asia. (Expect this to be a big topic at our Disrupt Beijing conference this fall. Tickets and more details will be available on TechCrunch soon.) Latest headlines delivered to you daily That was a tough headline to write, because it was difficult to summarize what the Click.to app does in one short sentence. But if you’re a Windows user, I encourage you to check it out anyway (Mac folks will have to wait a couple more weeks). If you’re anything like me, you use the CTRL-C command a lot. What Click.to does is display an ‘action bar’ whenever you copy something to your clipboard – whether it’s a photo, text or an Excel spreadsheet – that enables you to share the file in question to a variety of social networking and other online services, or other Web-based and even desktop applications. For example. When the app is running in the background, CTRL-Cing a picture on your desktop lets you easily – and quickly – send the file to your Facebook profile, add it as an attachment to an email you’re sending with Outlook, or open the image in Adobe Photoshop. Or copy any string of text, whether it’s from a conversation inside a chat window, a Word document or a browser tab, and jump straight to IMDB, Wikipedia or Google search. It sounds a bit silly, but it’s easy to get hooked on the app because of its sheer speed. Use it for a while and you’ll find that you really do waste a lot of timing performing actions like opening an app and clicking a few times before you can actually share a file. Click.to can help alleviate that problem. The pop-up bar that you get every single time you copy something to your clipboard can get annoying fast, though, but fortunately there’s a way to hide it automatically for specific applications (e.g. Skype or Google Chrome). Unfortunately, you can’t hide the bar only for specific Web apps (e.g. WordPress). Another gripe: Click.to decides which apps you’re most likely to use with any given action, so for examples it hides Twitter and Gmail when you CTRL-C an image, even if that’s exactly where you wanted it to end up. Other than that, it’s a neat little app that adds value for oversharers such as myself. I particularly like the fact that you can create your own actions in just a couple of steps, which I used to create a shortcut for searching companies in CrunchBase as an example. In spite of the app’s name and logo, the company behind the tool – Axonic – doesn’t own the click.to domain name, although they’re trying to buy it from the current owner. Head on over to clicktoapp.com and give it a whirl. Latest headlines delivered to you daily BlueCava, a startup that has developed technology that enables its customers to identify unique connected devices such as smartphones, TV set-top boxes, gaming consoles, computers and more, has raised $1.5 million in debt funding according to an SEC filing. Late last year, the company had already raised $5 million from billionaire investors such as Mark Cuban and oilman Tim Headington. BlueCava says its device identification technology is actually about 15 years old and dates back to Australian inventor Ric Richardson, who was also the road manager for the band INXS. Years after cooking it up in the nineties, Richardson’s idea became U.S, patent #5,490,216, and he later sued Microsoft (and many others) for infringing on his patent. In 2009, a jury awarded Uniloc USA (which BlueCava was spun out from) $388 million excluding damages or interest in the case against the Redmond software giant. You can read more back story here and here if you’re interested. BlueCava says the technology can theoretically identify the 10 billion (citation needed) internet-connected devices on the planet. The identification helps its customers target advertising and combat fraud, among other use cases. It’s a most interesting startup to keep tabs on – to give you an idea, its advisory board members include Joe Sullivan, Chief Security Officer at Facebook and Ellen Moskowitz, VP of Fraud Management Solutions at MasterCard. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Happy weekend, everyone! Yes, I know there’s still an entire unending work day ahead of us, but Gameloft is looking to start the transition into weekend mode sooner rather than later. Thus, we have Gameloft’s crazy “Three4Free” giveaway, where the publisher will give away one Andriod HD+ title for free during a two-hour window each day of this weekend. There’s no telling which games Gameloft will choose for the giveaway, but either way, a free Android HD+ title can’t hurt, right? If you agree, you’ll have to follow Gameloft’s UK Twitter account to keep up with the action. According to the official tweet, the first Android HD+ title will be announced late this afternoon. I haven’t been able to confirm just yet whether or not this promotion is available to us here in the States, or if it’s a deal reserved for our friends across the pond. I’m working on getting that update but until then, remember that if you live on this side (West) of the Atlantic, late afternoon in the UK translates to around noonish over here, depending on what Gameloft means by the word “late.” In any case, we’ll have our eyes peeled for the start of our first two-hour window and you should too. And again, happy weekend! [via EuroDroid] Latest headlines delivered to you daily You may remember Adly, a startup that in-stream ad network for celebrities and brands on social platforms like Twitter and MySpace. The company was also helping celebs promote brands on Facebook, but got the boot from Facebook (read more about why here). For background, Ad.ly links up advertisers with influencers and celebs and then distribute links to marketing campaigns through the celeb’s Tweet streams and MySpace updates streams with full disclosure. Today, the company is launching an analytics dashboard which is designed to help top influencers manage and grow their audiences on Twitter. The dashboard provides brands and celebrities with audience demographics of their followers and reveals who your top influencers are, which influencers and fans are messaging you, mentioning you, and retweeting your content. Adly will also show you which other celebrities and brands your fans follow, and how many fans you share in common. You can see who your “Mega Fans” are (the ones with the greatest reach and potential influence); follower growth over time, the gender breakdown of a follower base compared to the average Twitter audience, and the geographic breakdown of an audience compared to that of the average Twitter audience. For example, Snoop Dogg (@SnoopDogg) has more Twitter fans in Texas than he has in New York. Jet Blue (@JetBlue) can see that 24 percent of its followers are fans of 50 Cent (@50cent). Old Spice (@OldSpice) can see that 28 percent of its followers are fans of Charlie Sheen (@CharlieSheen). The New York Times (@NYTimes) can see that 29 percent of its followers are fans of CNN Breaking News (@CNNbrk) Adly Analytics also allows celebrities and brands to grant managers, agents and staff access to their Adly Analytics without sharing their Twitter passwords. There’s no doubt that analytics are now integral to any brand’s social media strategy. There are a number of startups that offer in-depth social media analytics such as Viralheat, HootSuite, PeopleBrowsr, Netvibes and Topsy. And we’ve seen some pretty major exits in the social media analytics world, including Radian 6 and Kosmix. Providing analytics alongside Adly’s ad and endorsement platform, makes sense. Of course, we know Twitter could have its own high-powered analytics platform in the works, especially considering the company’s recent purchase of social media analytcis startup BackType as well as last year’s acquisition of Smallthought. For now, Adly doesn’t seem to be in danger of violating Twitter’s advertising TOS. But Twitter hasn’t been the most developer-friendly company, and has cracked down on some companies using advertising on the platform. Adly also hasn’t written off recently acquired Myspace yet. Adly CEO Arnie Gullov-Singh believes Myspace may have comeback, especially when it comes to engaging celebs. Perhaps that’s why JT’s on board?   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Kickanotch Mobile, a mobile marketing services startup based in the outskirts of Kansas City, announced today that it has raised $500,000 in seed funding. The round was led by six angel investors and “incentivized by” Kansas Technology Enterprise Corporation, a private/public partnership created by the state of Kansas to promote technology-based economic development and support local entrepreneurship. The startup plans to use this infusion of capital to continue expanding its cloud-based technology and services, as well as its mobile platform, and to ramp up hiring efforts. Kickanotch, formerly known as PRONTO! Mobile, launched its mobile application and mobile marketing platform services back in May to offer TV broadcasters, radio stations, publishers and corporations a way to increase brand exposure and better utilize mobile revenue channels and consumer engagement opportunities. The startup works with media companies and small-to-medium-sized businesses to design a custom mobile strategy, assisting businesses in the design and implementation of mobile apps and features that enable them to make customized (and engaging) advertising campaigns and mobile apps. More specifically, Kickanotch allows its corporate customers to optimize and manage banner advertisements, as well as enhance their mobile presence and user experience with daily deal alerts, social media integration, QR codes, SMS and email marketing, analytics, and lead generation. As mobile advertising is growing like wildfire and is expected to hit $20 billion in revenue by 2015, Kickanotch aims to not only help businesses design a great mobile app, but to also give them the tools to monetize and create an addictive mobile experience for their customers. Essentially, the startup wants to offer businesses a turn-key mobile monetization solution as well as a mobile marketing manager. Its “Platform Mobile Manager” is designed to do just that. The cloud-based software allows startups and corporations to manage ads, SMS and email advertising, and coupons — all from a single dashboard. Of course, the startup has plenty of competition in the mobile advertising space, but its solution has already drawn more than 50 broadcast, publishing and corporate brands into the fold in only a few months, so there’s plenty of room for optimism. It’s great to see Kansas supporting and growing local technology companies. That’s just good policy. For more, check out the site here and meet the Kickanotch team here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily If photo sharing apps Instagram and Color would mate and have a baby, it would likely look something like the Instacolor app made by tinkerer Rakshith Krishnappa. Basically, the app aims to help Instragram users discover other users in their neighborhood, and lets you view photos posted by people around you in real time. The app can be downloaded from the App Store now and costs $0.99. Ever since Color launched its photo sharing app, the $41 million startup has been having a rough time. Co-founder Peter Pham left, or was fired, according to CEO Bill Nguyen, who also told the New York Times that the company is going back to the drawing board. Their biggest challenge right now: nobody seems to be using the app. Instagram, meanwhile, is on a roll. They’re at well over 5 million users now and roughly 100 million photos have been shared using the app to date. Earlier this year, Instagram debuted a realtime API to let third party developers build things like Instacolor, which takes both ideas and morphs them into one app (but uses Instagram as the foundation). Krishnappa also built Gramfeed, a Web interface for Instagram, by the way. Update: also check out Instabam. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Netvibes, a company that provides social media dashboards and news aggregators for brands and agencies, is debuting a powerful new analytics platform tonight. Netvibes’ new social analytics and monitoring platform is launching in private beta but won’t be available to the general public until later in the month. As we wrote last year, Netvibes launched Instant Dashboards, which allows users to enter a keyword on NetVibes’ site to pull up an instant dashboard that automatically collects all of the latest photos, videos, news, feeds, search results, Twitter conversations and more around that topic in realtime. The company’s new offering, Social Pack, is complimentary to the Instant Dashboard product, giving brand managers the ability to monitor and analyze at the same time. The platform’s Social Corpus gives you open access to add and control exactly what sources (blogs, influencers, news feeds) to pull data from. Plus, Netvibes features a built-in library of more than 200,000 original content feeds and apps to choose from. Similar to analytics platforms like Radian6, Netvibes tracks mentions and topics and gives brands insight to make sense of this data. The platform will identify trends, sentiment, influencers and ideas. You can dig pretty deep with data as well. For example, not only will Netvibes tell you who your top influencer is, but the technology will also show you which blog the influencer write for and what is being siad about a brand or product. And Netvibes will instantly create a new app just to analyze those specific keywords revealed by that one influencer and track them over time. Netvibes also allows you set specific tags to track certain mentions from specific sources. Netvibes allows managers to create an unlimited number of advanced alerts to automatically monitor the effectiveness of campaigns, brand reputation, competitors and even trigger actions, like adjusting campaign budgets, a newsletter response or invoking a URL. Alerts can be sent to any mobile device in real-time. While the Social Pack platform combined with the news aggregator platform is certainly an information overload, it could be a comprehensive tool for brand managers. Already many well-known agencies and brands are already using Netvibes’ enterprise offerings including Digitas, Coca-Cola, and L’Oreal. Of course, the enterprise dashboard isn’t cheap. The entire Social pack and Dashboard costs $15,000 for dashboard setup, then $2,000 per month. But clearly big brands are shelling out the cash for Netvibes product. And the company is profitable on a net income basis. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Although many investors are spinning for the chance to invest in Turntable.fm, the hot music startup has not yet picked a DJ, despite reports to the contrary. Business Insider claims that Turntable has raised $7.5 million at a $37.5 million valuation and “that term sheets were indeed signed yesterday.” But reached a few hours ago as he was boarding a plane, co-founder and chairman Seth Goldstein told me, “We have not closed any new financing.” There is certainly a lot of interest in Turntable from VCs who want to fund its next round. The buzz among venture investors is that there is intense competition for the deal, particularly between Union Square’s Fred Wilson, Accel, and Kleiner Perkins. Wilson is the clear favorite (Turntable is based in New York City), but he is being outbid by Accel and Kleiner. The rumor is that Wilson offered Turntable a $25 million pre-money valuation, while Accel and Kleiner offered double. That could have easily been pushed up to $30 million pre-money, in which case the $37.5 million figure would pencil out as a post-money valuation. (Just remember, VCs send signed term sheets all the time. It doesn’t mean the company has to accept the terms). Not only are top-tier VCs excited about Turntable, there’s even some potential acquirers sniffing around, including AOL, Facebook, and Sony. As far as I can tell, no formal offers were ever made because co-founders Goldstein and Billy Chasen just got this started and don’t want to sell. Plus, they obviously aren’t having any problems raising money. Why is everyone going gaga over a startup that launched with a completely different product, Stickybits, that never went anywhere? Turntable is a social music site where you enter different listening rooms in which players can become DJs and spin music while chatting with each other’s avatars. Chris Sacca likes to hang out there a lot (he is a previous investor, along with First Round and Polaris). It’s been gaining some impressive early traction, even though you still need to know someone to get in. It is social music discovery at its best. You can listen to hours of full-length songs selected by other players in a variety of different themed music rooms. The better the DJ, the more points everyone else rewards him with. And if you like a song you can add it to your playlist, or buy it through Amazon or iTunes. But the business is not a slam dunk. Turntable pays per-stream fees just like Pandora or other “Internet radio” services. The music labels could decide to crack down on Turntable and try to extract higher fees. But Turntable’s early growth and engagement numbers are too high to ignore. People spend hours in these rooms. Maybe this time, the labels won’t kill it before trying to work out a deal. Even then, though, Turntable will have to find other ways to make money—perhaps through digital goods or better avatars, sponsored rooms, or some people might be willing to pay to be a featured DJ. Latest headlines delivered to you daily One day after it announced an imminent US launch with no other details, an American Spotify user has sent us these screencaps showing pricing in US dollars. Only going by these screencaps, the Unlimited US Spotify plan will cost $4.99 a month without mobile streaming capability and the Premium Spotify plan with mobile access will cost $9.99 a month. According to the same source, a free version with limited plays is also available. Interesting enough, these amounts are less than what European users currently pay, at £4.99 ($8.00) and £9.99 ($16.00) respectively. It might just be that these are pre-launch placeholder site numbers, the fact that lesser competitor and US first mover Rdio charges the same amounts for what amounts to basically the same plans makes me believe that they might be legitimate (the logic being that the record companies gave both companies similar licensing deals). Peter Kafka also reported the $10 a month for Premium figure when he wrote about the company’s $100 million in funding at a $1 billion valuation earlier this month. So if the prices are in place what’s the holdup then? Well one source pegs the company as waiting for Facebook to get its music service together  — I’m hearing it’s a partnership with multiple companies including Spotify. In related news, code alluding to a product called Facebook Vibes was just discovered in the download files for FaceSkype video chat. So while we all wait for the launch of one, or the other or both simultaneously, read Paul Carr’s brilliant post on how Rdio captured the music in America’s heart first. Update from Spotify PR: “No details are set for the pricing or details of our US service yet – we’re still testing a number of different options. We’ll be sure to let you know when we have something to announce.”  Latest headlines delivered to you daily “If you don’t adapt, you die,” Loic Le Meur told me when he came into the TechCrunchTV studio last week. And Loic – aka monsieur Pivot – is certainly one of the Valley’s most skilled adaptors. Having founded Seesmic in 2008 as a video aggregation network, he then transformed it the next year into a popular consumer Twitter client before shifting it earlier this year into a Salesforce and Softbank backed enterprise CRM tool. The pivot, of course, is the thing these days. And Le Meur – perhaps because of his skill as a wind surfer – is a master of sniffing changes in the business environment before anyone else. In contrast with Catarina Fake and Philip Kaplan, Le Meur is strongly opposed to what the calls “the disposable start-up.” For him, he has a moral obligation to his investors at Seesmic (which include Mike Arrington) to adapt the company to the new environment – even if that sometimes means transforming the company into something unrecognizable from its previous incarnation. So is monsieur Pivot right – is the “disposable company” immoral? This is the second part of a two part interview with Le Meur. Yesterday, he explained why European start-up entrepreneurs have nothing to learn from their European counterparts. That post sparked a sharp rebuke from TechCrunch Europe’s Mike Butcher. And Loic responded himself in the original post comments. Why entrepreneurs who don’t adapt, dieFacebookLinkedInKeen On with Loic Le MeurSeesmic’s new CRM business modelFacebookLinkedInLoic Le Meur on Seesmic’s CRM Business ModelOn the immorality of the “disposable startup”FacebookLinkedInLoic Le Meur InterviewLatest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile social gaming company OpenFeint has nabbed a pretty key hire today—former Playdom exec Ethan Fassett. Fasset will be leading product development at OpenFeint, as senior vice president of product. Previously, Fassett was Playdom’s executive producer of its San Francisco studio. He helped drive product strategy for Playdom’s San Francisco studio, with a focus on player community engagement and monetization. He helped launch Playdom’s retail-themed social game, Market Street, which peaked at one million daily active users. Prior to Playdom, Fassett worked at teenage virtual world Gaia. As the SVP of product, Fassett will be working on growing player engagement for OpenFeint through new communication features. He will also aim to improve player acquisition for game developers with distribution tools and programs. OpenFeint, which was acquired by Japanese gaming company GREE earlier this year for $104 million, currently reaches 90 million users and powers 6,000 games across iOS and Android. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Getting ahead of any privacy issues surround your product is an important part of product development for any company. Facebook, unfortunately, learned this the hard way. Social gaming giant Zynga is adding a layer of transparency today with the launch of a new privacy initiative called PrivacyVille. In typical Zynga fashion, PrivacyVille isn’t your average dull privacy education course but is instead a game-like tutorial that rewards players with the company’s virtual currency zPoints in RewardVille for learning more about Zynga’s privacy practices. The game is actually modeled after CityVille, so players feel somwewhat at home navigating the game mechanics. You start the game in a small town, and travel through the town to learn more about important sections of Zynga’s Privacy Policy, as well as resources about controlling your information online. For example, when you start the game, Zynga tells you that in order to connect you to other people playing games on Facebook, it takes information from your Facebook profile, such your name, photos, and friends, to allow these games to become more social. Another privacy tutorial involved informing mobile gamers that Zynga will capture your device ID and IP address. And Zynga says that they and advertisers may collect cookies from your browsing behavior,that the company uses your email address to send alerts, and that while Facebook processes much of the payments for virtual goods, Zynga is using a transmissions technology to make sure your payments info is secure. In all, Zynga has 14 areas in the town for various privacy notifications. After reading all the notifications, you are then given a short quiz of five questions and will be taken to Rewardville to redeem your points. Also, you don’t need to be connected to Facebook or be registered as a Zynga player to tour PrivacyVille. However, if you are a Zynga player, you will have the option to connect to Zynga’s RewardVille and claim zPoints that can be used to redeem unique virtual items. As a side note, you can play PrivacyVille as much as you want but you will only get the rewards once. Zynga says that PrivacyVille is not intended to be a substitute for its Privacy Policy or Privacy Center, but is just a more engaging way to explain the company’s privacy interactions. Reggie Davis, Zynga’s General Counsel says of the new initiative: We know there is an interest in making privacy policies more approachable. We wanted to take a page from our game DNA to create a privacy tutorial that’s accessible, social and fun. We look forward to hearing feedback from players on how we can make it even easier for them to learn about our policies. This is no doubt a smart move for Zynga. As the company grows, mitigating these privacy stumbles is important. As the company revealed in its S-1 IPO filing last week, privacy regulation and Facebook sharing are challenges for Zynga going forth. In fact, both Facebook and Zynga were sued last year over privacy breaches. And the fact that Zynga is providing virtual currency as an incentive should prevent the privacy initiative from going unnoticed.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Back in March, as we reported on Offline Labs‘ initial funding, we also offered up a quick glimpse of their first project, codenamed Project Dragōn. Now the project, actually called Sōsh, is ready to be fully be revealed. The basic idea behind Sōsh is a simple one: “find and share interesting things to do,” co-founder Rishi Mandal says. “Life’s too short to be bored,” he continues noting that when most people do things, they tend to do the same things over and over again — go to the movies, go to the same restaurants, etc. That’s the hole in peoples’ lives that Sōsh is trying to fill. And to do that, they’re aiming at the city-level. Launching first in San Francisco, Sōsh is a website that gives you a few simple, but key ways to get ideas for things to do. The first way is algorithmic. The main page features a drop-down that reads “I’m looking for” — you select the type of activity you want to do. The second way Sōsh serves up ideas is through curation. Their team will look at all the different activities they’re crawling in a city and serve up what they believe are the best ones that should be highlighted. The third way is perhaps the most important: what your friends are doing. By tapping into your social graphs on Facebook and Twitter, Sōsh shows you a feed of what the people you’re already friends with are interested in doing. You can then start conversations around these activities, and hopefully even do something together. “Millions of people search for the phrase ‘things to do’ on Google — it’s almost as much as they search for Justin Bieber,” Mandal points out, laughing. But as he shows me, the results that Google serves up basically suck. Sōsh, quite simply, aims to not suck. When a user finds an activity on Sōsh that interests them, they can bookmark it with one click. From here, activities can be shared via the normal means: Twitter, Facebook, email, etc. You can also mark down things you’ve already done. And you can actually plan an activity with a simple, easy-to-follow form. In this regard, Sōsh is a bit like a more curated and less event-focused Plancast. Sōsh has a huge inventory of sources for their activities that they crawl automatically to put new ones into the system as they become available. It’s not about deals, but that could be an aspect, Mandal notes. But the goal is an even broader one. “People spend 90 percent of their time and money offline,” Mandal says, noting that their service is all about creating the best online experience to figure out what to do offline. Obviously, the team knows that many have been going after this very thing, but Mandal is encouraged by what he has seen as “many fantastic failures” saying that no one has yet nailed the “elusive” interest graph. And while Sōsh is just a traditional web-based app for now, the goal is to move to mobile quickly. They understand the true potential may lie there. And obviously, the hope is to expand beyond this initial beta in San Francisco as quickly as possible. “Our end goal is: someone went out and did something amazing,” Mandal says. “The mental model we’re competing for is: ‘What should we do? Let’s check Sōsh’,” he says. To celebrate the launch, Sōsh has given us 250 invites to give out to TechCrunch readers. Again, you’ll want to be based in San Francisco (or planning to come here) to use it. Enjoy. Others can sign up to be let into the beta on the site, and they’ll be letting people in on a rolling basis.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily When it comes to Swype and their crazy drag-through-letters-to-type alternative keyboard of the same name, there’s only one problem: it’s really, really tough to give up once you’ve gotten used to it. Alas, I’ve gotta deal with the withdrawal symptoms each and every time I jump from an Android device back to my iPhone, due to restrictions inherent to iOS. While Swype was purportedly working on something for iOS in June of last year (and, as the rumor mill had it, trying to convince Apple to make it official) all word of it went silent pretty quickly. The mission has been revived, it seems, albeit with someone else behind the charge: Andrew Liu, developer of the “DreamBoard” theming hack for jailbroken devices, has begun to “port” Swype to iOS.  Early this morning, Andrew released the first build of his Swype project, following up a few hours later by uploading it to a public Cydia repository. There are a few catches: We put “port” up above in quotes, by the way, as it’s not quite clear how much of this is actually Swype and how much is from-scratch code written to recreate Swype’s behaviors. While Andrew is calling the project Swype (which… probably isn’t the best idea, in the long run), it also seems like a lot of it is being built from the ground up rather than ported from one platform to the other. The guys over at iPhone Download Blog threw together a quick video demonstrating the psuedo-Swype running on iOS. Check it out below: Latest headlines delivered to you daily With the rise in prominence of the social graph, we’ve seen the proliferation of services like Facebook Connect, which have brought the social web to third party sites and helped make sharing an integral part of the Web’s new plumbing. Social seems to be the default setting these days, but as is often the case, there are a few exceptions. The online travel industry, for one, is composed of sites that came of age early in the evolution of the Web, and by and large, still lacks many of the features of Web 2.0, like discovery, openness, and social integration to name a few. For how popular peer and friend-based recommendation systems have become for movies, music, and other forms of content discovery, one might think that social recommendations would by now have made their way into the travel planning and exploration process. After all, when it comes to finding good places to visit when you’re traveling or on vacation, recommendations from friends tend to be of the most value. Last November, Gogobot launched to address this very issue, aiming to breathe new life into the online travel discovery space. With tight Facebook integration and a design geared toward the visual aspect of deciding what places to visit (Gogobot initially hand-curated over 100K photos from Flickr and other open photo resources), the startup positioned itself as the Yelp for travel, or as Mike Arrington put it, “a TripAdvisor that puts users first”. If you’re someone who travels frequently, and you enjoy reviewing the places you visit and, in turn, want tips from your friends on what places to check out on your next vacation, then Gogobot is right up your alley. For this reason, it’s of no surprise that, according to Gogobot CEO Travis Katz, the site has begun to gain a lot of traffic from Yelp users — those who like to travel, try new places, accommodations, and restaurants, and share their experiences after the fact. Like Yelp, users can navigate Gogobot by a simple keyword search, but in the case of the online travel site, users can view their friends’ “passports”, which provide images and reviews from all the places they’ve travelled. Gogobot recently added Foursquare and Facebook Places integration, too, so that every time you check-in via one of those services, your checkins show up on your Gogobot profile as well. And, since Gogobot is focused on providing an authentic visual experience, the site automatically tags your checkin with a Flickr image. Once you’ve checkedin, you can go back at a later date and add starred recommendations or write a longer review. Just as Foursquare has plans to utilize the massive data hive it’s collected from user checkins to create a future recommendation service based on past trends in your checkin activity, the big picture goal for Gogobot is to provide an engaging resource for users to create tons and tons of data around their travel preferences. Eventually, Katz told me, Gogobot wants to build a travel recommendation engine comparable to the one Netflix employs for its movie recommendations. So, to make this reality, Gogobot needs to become its own data hive, and thus needs to create an engaging user experience that encourages its users to spend time on the site, tagging, reviewing, checking-in, and so on. Today, Gogobot is announcing another key element in the effort to build an addictive resource and data mine: The addition of a gaming layer to its experience. Gogobot is today rolling out a game layer built on top of Facebook Places check-ins (the first of its kind that I’m aware of), as well as Foursquare, to turn both networks into a source of gaming mechanics that encourage travelers to compete with friends and other members of the community to earn points and badges by going about their daily Gogobot activity. Users can earn points simply by checking-in, but they earn a greater number of points by writing reviews, answering questions posed by other travelers, and commenting on other users’ reviews. The Gogobot badge system is very similar to the commenting reward system used by The Huffington Post, as well as the badge system in place for content producers on Bleacher Report. Obviously, while game mechanics and badges are by no means a new idea, it is very definitely a novel feature for the travel industry. Thus, if you’re someone that loves adding stamps to your passport and loves competing with friends and family for those stamps — if the idea of making travel into a game has some appeal — Gogobot has your number. In just six months since launching to the public, Gogobot users have shared more than 550,000 destinations across the globe with their networks on Gogobot. And though Katz was unwilling to share the site’s number of monthly active users, he did say that users are spending an average of 10.5 minutes on the site per visit, more than twice that of its competitors, like TripAdvisor and Fodor’s. He also said that traffic has grown by 70 percent in the last 30 days, so hockey-stick growth looks like it’s on the way, if not already in progress. As to how Gogobot will make money: It’s all about lead generation. The site is tightly integrated with Hotels.com, Kayak, Expedia, and TripAdvisor, to name a few, so when you’re checking out a review of a hotel in London, Gogobot allows you to go straight to Hotels.com to get a room and, when you do, Gogobot gets paid. (It also helps the financial cause to raise $4 million in seed funding from Battery Ventures.) Gogobot was also the winner of TechCrunch’s 2010 Crunchie Award for “Best Design”, so you know it’s gotta be good. But, if you’re still not yet convinced, check out our original in depth review here or check out the site itself here.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily In a blog post on the WordPress.com blog, Automattic‘s Justin Shreve this morning acknowledged his employer’s aspirations to turn WordPress.com into more of a platform than a mere Web-based blogging software service. The company has added support for authentication protocol OAuth 2 to WordPress.com and is debuting a brand new developer portal. Starting today, WordPress.com supports OAuth 2, an open authentication protocol that basically makes it easier for third party apps to connect with WordPress.com blogs through secure API authorization. That means developers can configure their applications to be able to access a WordPress.com blog without ever asking for personal details such as a password or username. However, somewhat hidden on the contact page of the new developer portal you’ll find that OAuth2 client access will be granted only on a limited basis for the time being. The only app using it today appears to be Memolane. The developer portal contains documents and resources aimed to help developers use WordPress.com technologies to build applications. The portal is fairly sparse t this point, but Automattic says it will be adding more resources and tools as its developer ecosystem grows. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Twitter co-founder Biz Stone is joining Spark Capital (which was an early investor in Twitter) as a strategic advisor, according to Spark Capital partner Bijan Sabet. Sabet writes that In this role, Biz will help us think through and evaluate new investment opportunities. Additionally he will provide us with valuable insight about our current portfolio companies as well. Sabet actually led Spark’s investment in Twitter and serves on the company’s board. We heard last week, Stone is also taking a step back from Twitter to re-team with Ev Williams and Jason Goldman (both of whom recently left their full-time duties at Twitter) to re-start The Obvious Corporation. The new venture plans to develop new projects and work on solving big problems aligned along a simple mission statement: The Obvious Corporation develops systems that help people work together to improve the world. Because of his role at the Obvious Corp.; we’re assuming Biz’s work at Spark Capital will be part time. Spark, which just participated in Foursquare’s massive round, also recently raised a new fund. Check out our Sarah Lacy’s in-depth conversation with Sabet earlier this year here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily YouTube has just unveiled an experimental new redesign called Project Panda, and it’s looking good. You can activate the redesign right here (and if you don’t like it, you can disable it from YouTube’s Test Tube control panel). Some initial impressions: The new design makes significant changes to the way playlists are presented, moving them in some cases from a sidebar to a scrolling horizontal bar of thumbnails just beneath the video you’re watching (it reminds me a little of YouTube’s LeanBack). The video player now has a darker theme that looks more polished, and there’s a dark background behind the player that highlights the content you’re viewing. And channel pages look a lot nicer, with big, wide images for each video.  Here’s how YouTube is describing the project: So what the heck is Cosmic Panda? We’re always trying out new things here at the Tube and Cosmic Panda is our way of letting you in on some of the fun. Here’s what to expect when you follow the cosmic panda over the double rainbow: The redesign is especially noteworthy because for a long time, YouTube was remarkably ugly for being the world’s most popular video portal — it was noisy, navigation was’t great, and the UI just seemed a bit outdated. Things have gotten a lot better in the last 18 months, though — YouTube announced a revamped ‘Watch’ page in January 2010 that was much cleaner (no more stars!) and has made incremental improvements since then. If it rolls out broadly, Cosmic Panda would be the most significant change yet.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Box, formerly usually referred to as Box.net, has landed a big customer: consumer goods juggernaut Procter & Gamble. The latter will bring Box’s cloud content management solution to 18,000 globally distributed employees following some test runs with a select number of P&G divisions. Procter & Gamble has 127,000 employees across more than 180 countries, so it’s important to note the deal leaves room for increased adoption within the company over the next three years. Box says the deployment represents its largest enterprise deal to date. Previously, Box was already powering internal and external content sharing and collaboration for a couple of P&G divisions. Its services are designed to empower P&G employees to share and access information across devices (with mobile applications for iPhone, iPad, and BlackBerry), without any P&G maintenance or upgrades. Box also says roughly 60,000 businesses and 6 million users are using its services today. The startup recently raised $48 million in Series D funding from Andreessen Horowitz, Meritech Capital Partners, and Emergence Capital Partners, bringing its total capital raised to roughly $78 million. For your further reading pleasure: Box.net Upgrades Cloud Storage Platform With New UI And Collaborative Features Box.net Ups The Ante Against Microsoft With In-Depth Google Docs Integration Latest headlines delivered to you daily If you’ve been just dying to blast out some tweets from the official BlackBerry Twitter client but were afraid that the Beta client might make your handset explode or something, two things: 1) You’re kind of a strange one, and 2) It’s go time!  This morning, Twitter for BlackBerry had its Beta tag peeled off, and it was bumped from the BlackBerry App World (BlAppWorld!) Beta Zone into the full-fledged store. This Beta-less build doesn’t bring a whole lot in terms of new stuff (the biggest features are things like color tweaks, a modification to how you access the Tweet Composition window, and local trends support in the Trending Topics screen), but hey — at least you absolutely know it won’t make your handset explode. Hopefully. Latest headlines delivered to you daily A Chicago startup Clean Urban Energy (CUE) raised $7 million in a series A round from Battery Ventures and Rho Ventures, the company announced today. CUE’s software-as-a-service “exploits the thermal mass of commercial office buildings to make [them] more efficient,” according to a company press statement. The software was developed at the University of Colorado, which struck an exclusive, research and development and licensing agreement with CUE in 2008. CUE claims it can lower buildings’ energy expenses by 15-30 percent through predictive modeling and optimization. The company can also aggregate energy demand across portfolios of buildings in cities, which means it has the potential to provide more macroscopic benefits. Utilities and grid operators in big cities could use CUE technology to understand how their biggest customers are using electricity, and to introduce price elasticity in cities, encouraging commercial customers to shift power use away from high- to low-price (and lower demand) periods. Power generated outside of high demand periods generally causes less pollution, today. It also relieves power companies from the need to develop new power generating facilities— like coal or nuclear plants that nobody seems to want in their back yard. With its new found capital, CUE aims to grow sales throughout cities in the U.S. including New York, Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Houston. Jason Matlof from Battery Ventures and Joshua Ruch from Rho Ventures are joining CUE’s board of directors with this round. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Onesheet, the latest project from ArtistData founder Brenden Mulligan launches into beta today. Like an About.me for bands, Mulligan holds that Onesheet is the simplest web presence for a band currently available. With Onesheet, bands can verify their identity through Facebook or Twitter and connect their musician-specific third party services like Soundcloud, Bandcamp and ReverbNation as well as social media services like Posterous, Tumblr and YouTube. Once all their content is in, bands can tweak their Onesheet’s design, making changes like font and widget positioning. Aside from this slight customization, bands really don’t have to do much work, as the service updates itself. Right now bands have limited options in terms of web presence, and with Myspace’s imminent fall, it might be a good idea to port your content from the flailing social network onto some place more stable. “Musicians are constantly having to direct fans from service to service and from used-to-be-awesome social network to now-is-awesome social network,” says Mulligan, who brings his copious industry experience with ArtistData to this endeavor. “It’s confusing for them and for their fans.” So why just not use About.me? Well namely because it doesn’t support band-specific data like concert dates and song uploads. In fact Mulligan has added this helpful addendum to the registration process, “Note: This site is built for musicians. If you want a personal page, click here.” The same exact problem exists with the web’s most ubiquitous presence option, Facebook Fan pages, which are more like places to interact with fans then a way to showcase your music. Hence Onesheet … At the moment Onesheet is bootstrapped, and Mulligan plans on monetizing by offerring premium features. Instagram, iTunes, Topspin and Rdio and other integrations are in the works. The beta is pretty much open and TechCrunch readers who happen to be in bands (I for one hope there are many of you) can sign up for Onesheet today and get access to a customized domain within the week, Mulligan tells me. “It’s so crazy easy to set one up, I think a lot of bands will give a try,” he says.   Latest headlines delivered to you daily Founded in 2008 by former BitTorrent employees Ashwin Navin and David Harrison, Flingo has slowly been building its smart TV app publishing empire for two years and the platform finally unveils itself today with some hefty partnerships. Co-founder Navin likens the core synchronization tech behind Flingo to an IntoNow for your television set, but it really is much more than that with its unprecedented technology and features enabling greater engagement between viewers, their television sets and the web. People who want to use Flingo and don’t already have it on their television sets can either buy a new Smart TV, a Flingo-enabled BlueRay player or a streaming box like a Roku. Because the co-founders have been steadily working on this for two years, the technology is already available in over half the televisions sold. And the company has managed to hook up with TV hardware companies like Samsung, LG, Vizio Insignia, Western Digital which means it’s already on 5.7 million screens in 117 countries.  The ultimate objective of Flingo is to merge TV and the web, allowing media partners like Fox, Showtime and Etsy and 65 others to build apps that integrate both. In addition Flingo has built its own apps on top of its platform and its Hovercraft content detection algorithm allows for all sorts of increased user interaction. “A colloquial gloss on every show” is how Navin describes it, “I think what we’ve done with smart TVs is adding a layer of intelligence.” Coming this August from Flingo are Hovercraft apps that overlay a Tweet stream, add a Facebook “Like” button and overlay TV reviews onto TV shows. Along with these apps, the Flingo platform offers a feature called Fling, which allows users to “fling” or push content from their browser into their television screens and mobile phones by using the Fling bookmarklet. Users can also use the bookmarklet to share content on Twitter and onto Facebook.  While Flingo’s inhouse offerings are impressive, the company hopes that developers will take the Flingo ball and run with it like Utiva did with its “What’s On” app, “We’re excited to see what development will take place. It’s difficult to say how developers will come up with stuff.” Navin tells me that the company plans on monetizing through advertising revenue share (consumers pay nothing extra) and is excited about the prospects of merging the economics of the web app business (a $40 billion dollar industry internationally) with television (a $70 billion dollar industry worldwide). Navin is also excited about the greater potential for targeted ads that Flingo allows, “Now Coke can sponsor a poll on American Idol, which is not only a new feature, but a new revenue opportunity,” he tells me.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily Mobile app CardFlick is launching in private beta today as a proximity-based business card sharing application. The startup’s iOS app allows you to upload your professional information wither manually or from Facebook, into a sleek digital business card. Once the card is personalized users can then share individually to contacts (via email) or can access others who have downloaded the app at an event. Basically, CardFlick will show you others in your area who you can share your business information with. When you’ve shared your digital business card with a contact, CardFlick will store a record of where and when you met. Additionally, when a user updates their contact information on CardFlick, everyone they have connected with is automatically updated as well. Digital business card sharing isn’t really new but the idea of sharing your professional contact information with those who are in close proximity could be a compelling addition to any networking or business event. CardFlick could partner with event organizers to create a branded app for event participants to share their contact info. Latest headlines delivered to you daily eBay has acquired mobile payments company Zong for $240 million in cash. The transaction is expected to close in the third quarter of 2011. Zong has been one of the pioneers in the mobile payments space, adding a compelling new way for consumers to pay for items online. Simply put, it lets you pay for things, particularly virtual goods online, via direct billing to your mobile phone. Consumers simply enter their mobile phone numbers in the payments process. When a user wants to purchase an item, he can enters his cell phone number on a site, the site sends a text message to the phone, the user confirms the transaction with a short reply, and all the charges show up on his phone bill. Zong powers this entire transaction. The company has partnered with over 250 carriers worldwide to offer the technology to mobile phone users. eBay says that Zong will add ‘complementary technology and talent’ to its PayPal division, giving consumers more ways to pay for virtual goods and products online. Scott Thompson, president of PayPal, said this in a release: “Commerce is changing. With mobile phones, we walk around with a mall in our pockets. PayPal helps to make money work better for customers in this new commerce reality – no matter how they want to pay or what device they’re using…We believe that Zong will strengthen this value by helping us reach the more than 4 billion people who have mobile phones, giving them more choice and security when they pay.” Zong, which was founded in 2008 by entrepreneur David Marcus, has raised a total of $27.5 million in funding. Matrix Partners’ Dana Stalder, who was the former CTO of PayPal, is on Zong’s board of directors. Stalder tells us that he’s spent a lot of time looking at financial services technology, and Zong was one of his first investments in the venture world. “It was clear to me at the time that we had space to build something big here,” he explains. In the digital goods category, carrier billed payments account for 50 percent of payment volume. It’s a frictionless payments mechanism, he says, and this makes it ideal for digital goods. For digital good providers, carrier billing provides the highest conversions and Zong helps PayPal shore up this category. Last year, Zong was spun off from its European parent, Echovox, and Marcus moved to the U.S. to run the fast growing company, which landed a pretty big deal last year with Facebook to become a an early mobile payment provider for Facebook Credits. Other partners include IMVU, Sulake (makers of Habbo Hotel), Big Fish Games, Sony Online Entertainment, Zynga, Playdom (owned by Disney), and Bigpoint. The company also launched Zong+, an extension of the mobile payment startup which lets users bill microtransactions to credit, debit and prepaid cards (instead of their phones). Marcus wrote in a post on the company’s site: I am so excited by the unique combination of PayPal’s 8 million merchants, brand power, risk management expertise, and financial stability, with Zong’s Carrier DNA, its largest direct carrier payments network, product innovation, and best-in-class carrier billing technology. This industry first is going to allow us to scale what we’ve built over the course of the past 3 years (and then some) in a massive way! Zong faces competition from Boku, which was also rumored to be the target of an acquisition as well. eBay and PayPal have been on a bit of an acquisition spree, so it’s not surprising that the e-commerce giant made another big buy. PayPal is facing competition from fast growing startups like Square and even Google, and the payments company needs to add compelling technologies to help draw merchants, consumers and local businesses. As we’ve seen in the past few months, PayPal acquired local payments and advertising company Where, and shelled out cash for mobile payments company Fig Card as well. Zong provides a seamless payments product that could help improve conversions for online merchants and digital goods (PayPal processed $3.4 billion in transactions for digital goods in 2010), and in the end, frictionless online payments is PayPal’s bread and butter. In fact, PayPal just upped estimates of the amount of mobile payments transactions using the technology this year; doubling the estimate to $3 billion in mobile total payments volume (TPV) in 2011. PayPal’s CFO Patrick Dupuis tells us the acquisition is an expansion of vision fo enabling commerce anytime anywhere, adding another payments source for PayPal’s 9 million merchants. Marcus tells us that PayPal’s ability to scale and accelerate with Zong’s built made it an appealing new home. Another draw for PayPal—Zong has pretty massive international reach, offering mobile payments in in 21 languages and 45 countries. The service’s technology is especially appealing in countries where mobile phone usage is high (as opposed to internet connectivity). Zong should also help PayPal expand its footprint in developing countries. In terms of integration, PayPal and Zong arent’s saying much as to how Zong will be branded in the future. Marcus says he will be staying on at PayPal. Unsurprisingly, Dupuis says that Marcus and his team will have a critical role in PayPal’s future transformation in the payments business. Stalder echoes this sentiment, explaining that PayPal, with Zong in hand, is in a better position to create the digital wallet of the future. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Virtualization startup Virtustream has raised $10 million in Series B round financing from Intel Capital, Columbia Capital, Noro-Moseley Partners, and TDFunds. This brings the company’s total funding to $59 million. Virtustream provides strategy, integration and managed services utilizing virtualization technologies, and xStream, the company’s cloud provisioning platform. xStream allows enterprise customer to access highly elastic cloud computing resources at a consumption-based pricing model, similar to Amazon EC2. Virtustream plans to used the new funding to productize xStream into a distributable end “cloud O/S” software product. Virtustream will also use the funding for branding, marketing and advertising and to expand market presence in San Francisco and London. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Google Ventures has quietly invested in a stealth startup called Wingu, reports StrategyFacts (subscription required). Indeed, while the Google Ventures website lists four career opportunities for one of its portfolio companies located in Cambridge, Massachusetts without naming Wingu, the stealth startup published the exact same job openings on its job board, leaving nothing to the imagination. Wingu is building a enterprise-grade cloud platform dubbed Elements that will enable research teams to collaborate more effectively and use data in ‘new ways’. Here are the four main selling points of Wingu’s platform, according to its website: MANAGE: Unify your cross-discipline teams on a common platform to share data and ideas. ANALYZE: Drive decision-making with our analytical workflows and discovery tools. SHARE: Connect your researchers across silos and geographical divides for better collaboration, coordination and communication. PROTECT: Breathe easy knowing that your data is backed and protected by leading systems and security experts. Wingu intends to distribute its research integration software on a subscription basis. The startup’s proposition sounds similar to that of Mendeley, a research network. Other similar services include Academia.edu (which we likened to a “Geni for researchers”) and Questia. If you know of any others, feel free to share them in comments. Latest headlines delivered to you daily In this day and age, with the ubiquity of WiFi, tablets, smartphones, and laptops, we live in a highly connected and increasingly mobile world. Though many people make daily commutes to the office, the truth is that many can still do their jobs while working remotely, be it from home, from the road, or from the local library or coffee shop. Of course, having a quiet place to be productive (answer email) is welcome and, if that space is shared by those in similar professions, it can be a great opportunity to network and make connections. The problem is, for those who work far from company headquarters, or in a startup or small business, finding cool, local office space can be tricky. It is for this reason that Campbell McKellar and team created Loosecubes, a community marketplace for workspace that connects people who have great workspace with those who need it. Loosecubes aims to bring the many online connections we cultivate on a daily basis into the real world, during business hours, by enabling wayfaring professionals to find awesome shared workspace. Founded in 2010, Loosecubes offers, at least superficially, a similar service to Liquidspace. But Loosecubes takes a more social, or person-to-person approach to finding shared office space. As McKellar says, “it’s about so much more than finding a desk”, it’s about finding available office space offered by people with interests (and professions) that are similar to your own. The startup is broadly launching a public redesign today, though it will remain in public beta, to build off the traction it received at SxSW this year with its Instant Jelly app, which allowed conference-goers to create spontaneous co-working events with people of similar professions. So, in order to create a more personalized marketplace for shared office space, Loosecubes is launching some cool new functionality today that includes “Recommended Spaces”, in which the startup will tap into your social graph (via Facebook Connect) to recommend office space based on your friends, location, and line of work. Loosecubes also enables “Hosts”, or those with office space to rent and share, to post office space for free and to invite coworkers or friends to come share the office space. Hosts can specify which type of professionals they’d like to host, like entrepreneurs, developers, investors, etc., as well as including pictures of the office space, location, and so on. (Beware of hosting bloggers, though, they will drink all your coffee and slow your WiFi to a crawl.) And for those looking for space rather than looking to host, Loosecubes provides search functionality, in which users can look for coworking space by city, address, or zip. Once users find space they’re interested in, they can message the host and work out the terms of their new professional coworking relationship. Users can specify on their profiles, or in messages to their hosts, whether they’re looking for office space for the day or for a month, Loosecubes doesn’t limit these requests by duration — it’s up to the respective parties to decide. In terms of pricing, Loosecubes members who are invited to cowork receive special deals on a space when they’re invited, in order to incentivize you office-space-hunters to join the Loosecubes network. What’s more, the Airbnb for office space lets users pay online for office space. The startup charges a 10 percent transaction fee, because even though they’re backed by Accel and Battery Ventures for $1.23 million, they need to make money somehow. For the first 60 days, however, Loosecubes will be waiving that 10 percent transaction, so if you want to avoid the surcharges, sign up now. Host offices decide how much to charge, but Loosecubes encourages those hosting office space to include printing, scanning, faxing, phone, etc. in the price so that you’re not met with additional charges. But, in the end, Loosecubes just provides the marketplace, the sellers decide the terms. Once Loosecubes comes out of public beta, it will likely begin charging for listings, but until then it’s free to list and use. Airbnb, Hotel Tonight, Hurricane Party, BatchBlue, and SnapGoods are among the startups already offering office space on Loosecubes. Other office space of not includes Rickshaw Bags headquarters, Red Paper Clip, Platform4 in Denmark, and Society M in Glasgow. All in all, Loosecubes’ new design looks fantastic, and search is much improved, though I’m still waiting for mobile apps. The New York City-based startup is getting some good buzz right now, so check ’em out and let us know if you’ll be joining in or opting out.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily I recall a time a few years ago when Twitter was scoffed at. It was the blogosphere’s punching-bag. It was the stupid little service that no one in their right mind would ever use. It was for people who wanted to share the mundane bits of their lives — that no one else wanted to read. It was for egomaniacs. Or losers. It would never catch on. And then it did. I was thinking about this today as I stood in the East Room of the White House (#humblebrag). Why was I there? To see Twitter co-founder Jack Dorsey moderate a Q&A session with President Obama. Yes, the President of the United States was answering questions that were coming entirely from Twitter, the formerly stupid service that was a joke, remember? The most fascinating thing about the event today was how well it worked. A week ago, the White House sent out a press release letting people know about the event and asking that questions be submitted via Twitter using the hashtag “#askobama”. Twitter then teamed with Mass Relevance, used their own algorithms, and assigned curators with political expertise to select the questions that would be asked. In total, there were some 169,395 tweets with the #askobama hashtag, we’re told. Much like the debates we see during election cycles, neither Dorsey nor the President knew what questions had been selected ahead of time. What ensued was an in-depth and fairly candid conversation about a range of topics that people actually care about. According to the stats compiled by Mass Relevance, 26 percent of the Tweet questions were about jobs, 19 percent were about the budget, 16 percent were about taxes, 10 percent were about education, and 6 percent were about housing. All of the questions were serious in nature. And questions were also coming in during the event as well. A few times, Dorsey would select one as fresh as 10 minutes old to ask the President. Often, these would be about an answer the President gave earlier during the event. The President would then further clarify his stance. Realtime. And a few Tweet questions were selected from well-known political entities as well, such as Speaker of the House John Boehner (a Republican) and New York Times columnist Nick Kristof. Some might have a problem with this, since these people can ask questions of the President basically any time — but the transparency of it happening over Twitter was refreshing. When the President addressed Boehner’s question on debt and job growth, he was quick to note that his rival’s position is “slightly skewed” in his view, but he still answered it — and then made fun of Boehner’s poor typing skills (which apparently wasn’t his fault). After embarking on a record spending binge that’s left us deeper in debt, where are the jobs? #AskObama — John Boehner (@johnboehner) July 6, 2011  Of course, townhalls are just about as old as modern politics itself. And technology disrupting politics is nothing new either. Many are still certain that Kennedy won the 1960 election simply because he looked better on TV than Nixon, for example. But somehow Twitter and political discourse just feel right together. I recall having this conversation during the 2008 political primaries. Again, people were largely divided on the issue at the time — as many were still divided on Twitter, a fact not helped by a myriad of downtime issues that year. But with scaling problems far behind them, events like the one today appear to make the Twitter/politics symbiotic relationship more clear than ever. I suspect that during the 2012 election cycle, things are going to get truly insane (hopefully in a good way). When you compare today’s event to the similar townhall-style event that Facebook did with the President (at Facebook’s headquarters) earlier this year, I don’t think there is any question that this one was better. To me, the Facebook event was more akin to an old-school MTV townhall, or even a “Rock the Vote” event. Facebook is today’s equivalent of MTV. It’s where politicians go to get “cred” in front of a massive audience. But the events themselves are often of little substance. Twitter, by comparison, is still a fraction of the size of Facebook. The President doesn’t have to use such an event to push some big agenda or to try too hard to appeal to a certain demographic (though there is still some of that, of course), he can just take and answer serious questions seriously. If you had said four years ago that a Twitter event with the President would come across as dignified, everyone would have laughed. Hell, just using the words “Twitter” and “President” in the same sentence would have brought about uncontrollable laughter. But it worked seamlessly today. Still, some thought today’s event seemed more of a “meaningless marketing stunt” (of course, the author of that post, Umair Haque, is the same guy who held one of the worst Q&A’s the modern tech world has seen at SXSW two years ago with — wait for it — then-Twitter CEO Evan Williams). To me, today seemed like the logical evolution of the townhall format. Forget the questions from the audience which often range from mediocre to poor and involve the politicians needlessly pandering to the crowd — “thank you SO much for your question, and I too grew up on a farm”. Get a question — the best one from anywhere — answer it, move on to the next one. When I read a few weeks ago that the President would finally be sending his own Tweets from his account, I too was a bit dubious. Why now? Oh, because there is an re-election campaign kicking off, of course. But to be honest, I was more worried that the President being too accessible via a service like Twitter might in some ways demean the postion — not a popular thing to say, perhaps, but it’s something I suspect many people think. I wouldn’t want a President that Tweets all day. And again, that’s why I think today’s event was the perfect compromise. The President will Tweet from time to time (undoubtedly often to help his campaign), but he should hold back most responses until he can give them in a more dignified setting — like at the White House during a townhall event. Yes, even one that was technically a “Tweetup” (god that word sounds so lame still). And while questions can be brief, answers on important topics often require far more than 140 characters. This format works. Twitter is a channel through which everyone can be heard. Yes, you still have to sign up for an account, but that’s free — the barrier to entry for participating in these Q&A sessions has never been lower. That’s a great thing. That’s truly powerful. And the White House is right to respect it. After today’s event, I went back through some of my old posts about Twitter, trying to recall just how little respect the service got even just a few years ago. Here’s one great example: some wondered if Twitter was going to fail because no one knew about it at a random wedding. Right. (And bonus points to me for that part at the end where I wonder what would happen if the iPhone gained a built-in Twitter button…) Today I stood in the East Room of the White House with a President. To his left hung the Lansdowne portrait — the White House’s old possession — painted in 1797 (and rescued from the 1814 fire) depicting George Washington. To his right hung the companion portrait of Martha Washington painted in 1878. But front and center was a big screen television showing the Tweets directed at the President. Times change. Twitter, the little service that couldn’t, now has the President’s ear.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMakerBot’s Bre Pettis on Entering the Startup GameChris Dixon heads down the homestretch of his Founder Stories interview with Bre Pettis and the two touch on the fact that the barriers to entry for founders foaming at the mouth to launch hardware startups are being washed away. Pettis says, “we’re seeing this startup culture come into hardware, where normally this was just the realm of the really big companies who could afford to do this kind of R&D and development and I think in the next ten years we are going to see a huge amount of hardware startups.” Speaking to the similarities of the respective startup sectors, Dixon says, “it used to cost 30 million [to launch a startup],  you had to run a data center and do all these other things, and now you can do it on a couple thousand dollars and that sort of created a renaissance of, I think, internet startups. And it also allowed a new class of people who aren’t hypertechnical to do stuff.” As evidence by the conversation above, getting in the game is getting easier—and if you’re looking to do so, Pettis offers this advice: “Make it so people can do things with your hardware that you don’t expect, leave openings, try and be future compatible. ” The two finish up by turning the spotlight on the actual MakerBot and remove a freshly completed rocket ship from its innards—while also discussing the good luck charm that is the band, Daft Punk. Make sure to watch the previous episodes in the Founder Stories MakerBot series here and here, and past episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInBre Pettis on Running a Nuts and Bolts BusinessAs Bre Pettis continues his conversation with Founder Stories host, Chris Dixon, the two discuss the challenges of running a business that literally requires nuts and bolts assembly. In this situation, scaling brings a whole new set of challenges unfamiliar to many software start-ups. Hardware is just a different game.  For example, as Pettis tells it, “we ran out of motors, we bought all of them in the world, we went to buy more and they were like you’ve got them all. And so we had to figure out how to like get motors manufactured and custom made for us. So in terms of hardware that’s kind of been a bunch of the challenges.” Dixon admits, sometimes it is “hard for us software people to grok how different it is.”  (Disclosure: Dixon is an investor in Makerbot through Founder Collective). And when the times get tough, the tough go to China.  Make sure to listen to the entire exchange as Pettis also talks about the importance of face-to-face interaction as a greaser for getting stuff done. Below, Pettis talks about how Makerbot got off the ground.  “We started with 3 guys, a laser cutter, and a dream,” he says. Dixon inquires about copycats who might take on the MakerBot concept and in doing so turn MakerBot into a shadow of its former self.  Pettis seems anything but concerned and partially responds by saying, “we’ve got a brand, I don’t know exactly how to quantify that, but you know, when you think about 3D printing, you’re makerbotting, and that’s powerful.” The two go on and discuss Makerbot’s open source platform, hacking on the site and the flow of cash coming into the company. Make sure to watch Part I here and past Founder Stories episodes here. <div><div><script src=”http://www.crunchbase.com/javascripts/widget.js” type=”text/javascript”></script><div><a href=”http://www.crunchbase.com/” rel=”nofollow”>CrunchBase Information</a></div></div><div><div><a href=”http://www.crunchbase.com/company/makerbot”>MakerBot</a></div><div><script src=”http://www.crunchbase.com/cbw/company/makerbot.js” type=”text/javascript”></script></div><div><a href=”http://www.crunchbase.com/person/bre-pettis”>Bre Pettis</a></div><div><script src=”http://www.crunchbase.com/cbw/person/bre-pettis.js” type=”text/javascript”></script></div><div><a href=”http://www.crunchbase.com/person/chris-dixon”>Chris Dixon</a></div><div><script src=”http://www.crunchbase.com/cbw/person/chris-dixon.js” type=”text/javascript”></script></div><div>Information provided by <a href=”http://www.crunchbase.com/” rel=”nofollow”>CrunchBase</a></div></div></div> Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMakerBot’s Bre Pettis on His Home Based 3D Printing MachineIn this episode of Founder Stories, host Chris Dixon takes a look at a 3D printer while talking to the maker behind the MakerBot, Bre Pettis. If printing 3D objects sounds impressive, think about this. Pettis thinks “it’s early days”—drawing comparisons to early PC’s like the Altair. About the size of a mini-fridge, the Makerbot ships for $1,299 and allows users to create their own objects via CAD software (or users can select from “more than 10,000 things” on Thingiverse says Pettis) and print them out in a matter of minutes. Products range from shower curtain rings and eyeglass rims to mini-buildings and movable plastic hearts. We actually tested the Makerbot in our studio and came away with a rocket (Dixon takes it out at the end of the series). When Dixon asks Pettis how MakerBot is able to make and sell 3-D printers for under $1,500 when corporate models are priced between $20,000 to $1,000,000, Pettis responds, “We just came at it from a totally different place you know.  They are servicing a market of it has to work, it has to be perfect, it has to be 99.9999% accurate and we came at it from like, ok what is the absolute minimum we can do to make it work, and then let’s try that and if it works, ship it.” Picking up on their conversation below, Pettis discusses his background (former puppeteer), the competition and the future of home based 3D printing.  When Dixon asks Pettis what the landscape looks like “in 5 to 10 years” Pettis responds by saying he hopes to “get one in front of every kid, one Makerbot per child.” Make sure to watch both clips for additional insights, including the new feature Makebot recently rolled out. Past episodes of Founder Stories with Mike McCue, Dennis Crowley, David Karp and Soraya Darbi are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInEventbrite Founders Discuss Digital SecurityWith more than $400 million in projected gross sales for 2011, Eventbrite is getting big enough that it has to worry about fending off the criminals. In the above clip of Founder Stories with Chris Dixon, Julia Hartz discusses Eventbrites’ digital shield, while her partner in crime Kevin Hartz describes a new box-office iPad app the ticketing site recently rolled out. Speaking to theft, the majority of illegal activity on Eventbrite is not from thieves purchasing tickets with stolen cards says Julia, rather the real issue is entirely different.  She says “we are a self service platform and anybody can create an event and you know that presents an opportunity for fraudsters to run credit cards through our system.”  To combat the issue of crime, Eventbrite has created its own in-house security team, which Julia calls “a competitive advantage.” With one team locking down fraud, another team locks down mobile sales. In the back end of the clip, Kevin Hartz discusses their new feature, “Eventbrite at the Door” an iPad app that was roughly a year in development and provides convenience by allowing event organizers to “collect money at the door, swipe credit cards, collect cash and really tie the two systems together.” In the exchange below, the husband and wife team discuss, well, being a husband and wife team. Says Juila, “We learned a really valuable lesson early on from Michael and Xochi Burch who funded Bebo … they said divide and conquer, never work on the same project at the same time. We have actually followed that to a tee for the last five years.” The two go on to discuss hiring based on IQ vs. EQ, their long range plans for Eventbrite (their exit strategy is “when we die”) and offer advice to rising entrepreneurs. Make sure to watch episodes I and II of Chris Dixon’s interview with Eventbrite. And, be sure to check out past interviews of Founder Stories. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Decide.com has been cloaked in stealth mode for nearly the last two years. During that time, the startup has remained tight-lipped about what it’s been up to, while at the same time managing to raise $8.5 million from Maveron, Madrona Venture Group, Google founding board member Ram Shriram, former Expedia CEO Erik Blachford, and others — all in the name of building a “revolutionary new shopping service that will bring unprecedented levels of transparency to electronics shopping”. Today, Decide is finally ready to unveil what it’s been working on and launch that new shopping service into the wild. The proposed goal? To offer a novel comparison-shopping tool that will take that feeling of nagging regret out of consumer electronics purchases. For those who may not be familiar with the regret associated with the consumer electronics shopping experience, Best Buy actually released a great commercial a few months back that highlights the often annoyingly speedy pace at which new product iterations and updates hit the market. Figuratively speaking, it always seems that just as soon as one buys a 3D TV, a 4D TV is right around the corner. Decide tackles this problem by giving users a service that uses data mining techniques to tell a consumer whether they should buy a device now or wait until there’s a cheaper model on the market. After all, in doing its year-and-a-half due diligence, Decide observed that, in 2010, an average of six new laptops were released into the market each day, plus one new TV and one new camera every other day. And, as electronics geeks know, many device manufacturers make announcements or start planting rumors about their next generation devices months before they are available on the market. MacRumors is one popular example of the many websites and blogs that traffic in these tips and early rumblings. Thus, Decide is offering consumers a tool that uses proprietary data and predictive algorithms to tell them when they can buy with confidence, or whether they should wait for a price drop or a new model that’s slated to be released in just a few days. Decide matches hundreds of thousands of devices to their “model lineages” and crawls the Web for news and rumors, as well as applying “advanced machine learning and text mining algorithms” to predict future product releases. Rather than rely on trade-in credits or buyback programs, Decide wants to give consumers the ability to make the right choice the first time. It does this by using price prediction algorithms that take into account billions of observed price movements and over 40 distinct factors to offer comprehensive predictions. Considering that Decide was founded by Oren Etzioni, the former founder of Farecast, an airfare predictions service, Metacrawler, a metasearch engine, and Netbot, one of the Web’s first comparison-shopping services, and has added several founding developers from PriceYeti (which allows anyone to track any item on the web and get an email instantly when the price drops) and Eggsprout (which compiled data on resumes) — it’s probably fair to say that Decide is a high-level, suped-up Farecast for products. While Decide intends to eventually become consumers’ go-to resource for all things consumer electronics, the service is currently only available for TV, laptop, and camera shoppers. More to electronics will be added later this year. So how does it work? Users simply go to Decide.com and search for, say, a TV that he or she wants to buy. Decide then comes back with a recommendation on whether to buy or wait based on its proprietary predictions about future prices and model releases. Then, if the user wants to buy, they simply click through to the seller of their choice — Decide offers pricing on hundreds of thousands of products, too, so it’s a fairly wide selection. If, based on Decide’s suggestion, a user chooses to wait, they can view a timeline that shows when the product will be coming down in price and estimates how much that change will be. The user can set an alert to ping them when the product comes down in price, which is added to their “Watch List”, a la eBay. Decide will also alert you if you’re unwittingly looking at an older iteration of a product you want, and at at the bottom of each product description, it presents a timeline of releases so that users can view when prior iterations were released and when it predicts new models to arrive. It also gives the user a “confidence score”, so they’ll know just how likely a new product is to be release in 2 weeks, for example. The startup’s service provides much needed amplification to the typical comparison-shopping experience — and the many comparison shopping sites out there on the Web. Using complex algorithms plus the aggregation of data like CE and OEM press releases and sites trafficking in rumors and tips is a great concept, with a little dash of eBay’s user experience may prove to be a successful hybrid model. Of course, it’s all a matter of how accurate Decide’s secret sauce proves to be in predicting the best time to buy. But, with a year-and-a-half of data mining under its belt and a veteran team of data and search experts, I’m expecting good things from Decide.com. Let us know what you think.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInEventbrite Founders on Facebook, Twitter and LinkedInChris Dixon resumes his Founder Stories conversation with Eventbrite’s Kevin and Julia Hartz by asking questions about their strategy for attracting customers. Not surprisingly Facebook, Twitter and LinkedIn all factor in to the mix. Julia Hartz says initially Eventbrite positioned itself to be “highly optimized for search engines and discovery.”  However, search eventually gave way to sharing in the form of Facebook, and now according to Julia, “Facebook is the number one driver of traffic to our site.” (It has been for a while). She notes “It’s extremely easy to get people to share what events they are going to because events are inherently social”  and continues by saying with the “ticket buyer sharing where they’re going” it drives “real traffic back to the site as well as ticket sales.” Recognizing the importance of not being “reliant on a single source” Kevin tells Chris that Twitter is also a player in their digital strategy as is LinkedIn because “conferences/professional events is still the largest, single largest percentage of events on our system.” In the below clip, Dixon asks about competition—specifically Ticketmaster.  Kevin responds by talking about the challenges of getting into the music market with some of the contracts that it requires and then lists events Ticketmaster does not necessarily service, such as “a small show, a club … attending a wine tasting event.”  Julia notes “there’s always a little bit of friction when you’re trying to democratize an industry” and speaking to “traditional ways of doing ticketing … in music and live entertainment” Julia says it requires “exorbitant fees and that is just not what we stand for.” Make sure to check it all out in these two videos—and in case you missed episode I with Kevin and Julia Hartz you can find it here. Past episodes of Founder Stories are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInEventbrite’s Kevin Hartz Discusses Career Motives and InfluncesEventbrite, the company that lets anyone organize online events and sell tickets to those events, was founded by the husband and wife team of Kevin and Julia Hartz. Chris Dixon sat down with the power couple to discuss the early days of Eventbrite and some of the disruption that Kevin created along the way. Check it all out in this episode of Founder Stories. In the first clip, Hartz takes us back to the late 90’s when he created and sold his first company (which provided hotels with high speed internet access) to LodgeNet.  Then, drawing upon the business blueprint and success of PayPal, where he was an early investor, Hartz built Xoom, a service he says is a “better, cheaper, faster” Western Union that services immigrants and their overseas families. Riding the ups and downs of being a “first time CEO” while fending off “massive fraud attacks” at Xoom wasn’t easy. Hartz eventually turned Xoom over to a new management team and launched Eventbrite; yet another company that quenched his thirst to challenge “large incumbents.” In the below segment, Co-founder Julia Hartz jumps in and expands upon Eventbrite’s origins, saying, “we looked at the industry of event ticketing as something that was ripe for disruption because there was no solution for anybody to sell tickets online.” In agreement, Kevin compared the situation to a “pyramid” with Ticketmaster catering to “big complex events” while leaving room for other companies to swoop in and service smaller events. Recognizing opportunity, Kevin and Julia swung the doors wide open.  This year, Eventbrite is on track to sell $400 million worth of tickets. Full exchange is below—check it out. Past Founder Stories episodes with Fred Wilson, Soraya Darbi, Dennis Crowley and Kevin Ryan are here Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInFred Wilson On Disruption: "You Can't Stop What People Ultimately Want To Have Happen"New York’s Internet Week featured a panel discussion with Union Square’s Fred Wilson, Hunch’s Chris Dixon and SV Angel’s David Lee. We took a camera to the event and have been posting excerpts all week. In this outtake – the three dive into a discussion about disruption. Dixon teed up the conversation by talking about areas he considered ripe for disruption: Education, finance and government—saying government incumbents and lobbyists hinder development and have no real reason to push for change. Lee took the mic and tossed healthcare into the mix before wrapping by saying “there is a lot of inefficiencies in those systems … and we think that … anytime there is that type of inefficiency there is an opportunity.” Batting third, Wilson claimed that “politics and government have been a terrible place to invest, education has been a terrible place to invest but that is because the entrenched interests make it a terrible place to invest. The way you invest in those sectors is you go against the entrenched interests, you try and disrupt the entrenched interests, not to service them.” Wilson highlighted Sal Khan who created more than 2,000 free online classes through his Khan Academy and noted that “the vast majority of people who are on Khan Academy are not in the United States.”  Saying “if you really want to see how the world is changing go to Sub-Saharan Africa or go to Southeast Asia or go to Eastern Europe and parts of the world that have not had things that we take for granted and look at how they are using the internet to get access to those things and I think that is where you see the big game changing things are going to happen.” The three go on to discuss disruption in the TV, hotel (Airbnb) and music industries with Wilson noting “you can’t stop what people ultimately want to have happen.” Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMike McCue’s Early DaysBefore Mike McCue discovered how to flip an iPad into a device that made reading digital magazines a cinch, he himself was discovered by some of the biggest names in the tech world while working away in Silicon Valley Woodstock, New York. In this episode of Founder Stories with Chris Dixon, you’ll hear them geek out about programming video games for the TI99 in Extended Basic, how McCue went to IBM instead of college, discuss how he made ends meet when money was tight, how that situation changed a million times over, and the idea behind his first startup, Paper Software. “The idea was to create technology as simple and practical as a piece of paper,” he says. After a few twists and turns, it was acquired by Netscape, where he found himself when a little thing called JavaScript hit the programming world. Then, after AOL bought Netscape, McCue tells Dixon he decided to re-scratch his entrepreneurial itch and describes jumping back into the founder game with his startup, TellMe. “We we wanted to build Dialtone 2.0,” he says. Hear it all in his own words. In the below interview, McCue picks up where he left off and discusses narrowly steering TellMe away from a dot.com crashing landing while overseeing a staff of 200 and spending “$45 million a year and little revenue”  in the charred market of 2000. Fortunately, TellMe was able to raise a final $125 million round. “As the money was coming in from the banks,” recalls McCue, “the market was crashing.” He had some hard decisions to make as he prepared to “march through the desert.” It all turned out okay. TellMe was eventually bought by Microsoft for $800 million. But getting there wasn’t easy. Tomorrow, we’ll post more videos from this interview. Make sure to catch past episodes of Founder Stories with guests ranging Dennis Crowley and Mike Walwrath to David Karp and Lauren Leto here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInOhanian on the Impact of Jobs and Investors’ AttitudesColor gets bashed as being a contributing player to the so called startup bubble and the frat-boy attitude of investors from the Web 1.0 era don’t do much better in this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon and Reddit Co-founder Alexis Ohanian, who is now with Y Combinator and Hipmunk. In a conversation spanning a variety of topics, you’ll hear Ohanian describe how “Lord Jobs” has indirectly contributed to the success of Zappos and Instagram, the gaping opportunities for start-ups to solve, and the attitude adjustment seen in present day investors; swinging a big load of cash (and something else) doesn’t cut it with this class of start-ups. Make sure to watch the clip to hear insights on the above – and why we might expect to see a softer landing if the speculated bubble ever bursts. Below, Ohanian describes his leadership style, why he thinks start-ups fail (it has more to do with just “bad logos” says Ohanian when pressed by Dixon) and what Ohanian looks for when hiring. Past episodes of Dixon’s interview with Ohanian are here and here. Prior Founder Stories interviews with leaders such as Seth Sternberg, Mike Walrath and Dennis Crowley are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInOhanian’s Life Outside of RedditAlexis Ohanain continues his coversation with Founder Stories host Chris Dixon by discussing some of his activities and interests outside of Reddit. Highlights of their chat include Ohanian telling Dixon he considers Paul Newman, “the OG of social enterprise” and that Newman was the inspiration for Breadpig, Ohanian’s organization that creates “geeky things” and donates profits to worthy causes.  On his role as the Y Combinator ambassador to New York, where Ohanian mentors budding New York-based Y Combinator founders, Ohanian notes “you can’t spell New York City without YC” and on founding his angel investing firm Das Kapital Capital, Ohanian says he did it, “mostly so I can mess with the tellers of Bank of America—are you a communist?” It is a breezy and entertaining episode where the two go on to discuss World of WarCraft, Everquest and an interesting guerilla advertising campaign deployed by the Y Combinator company Grubwithus.  The two conclude with Ohanian telling Dixon the key ingredient Ohanian must have before doing a start-up. In the video below, Ohanian talks about “taking the agony out of travel search” with Hipmunk—where Ohanian serves as the marketing director, his mixed emotions about marketing and the power of word of mouth advertising. In case you missed part I of Dixon’s interview with Ohanian you can find it here. Prior episodes of Founder Stories with Soraya Darabi, Kevin Ryan and Christopher Poole are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInAlexis Ohanian on Starting RedditIn this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Reddit Founder, Alexis Ohanian takes Dixon back to his college days at the University of Virginia where he and co-founder Steve Huffman bonded over video games and began plotting ways to avoid taking a real job after graduation. Not wanting to be holed-up in a cubicle for 50 years, they submitted an idea to Y Combinator, the idea got rejected, they got accepted, and together began building around the concept of “people deliberately trying to find and share new and interesting stuff online” says Ohanian. Joking about “competitive analysis” Ohanian tells Dixon he wasn’t even familiar with Digg until “about a week or two after we had launched” and says interestingly enough, “it was this classic example of alright, you’ve launched, it turns out there is someone else who is in your space, who has already got a significant advantage, and you know, that is not time to quit, that is just time to keep doing what you are doing.” The boys kept on doing, and did quite well. Less than two years after launching they sold Reddit to Conde Nast and Ohanian says Reddit is currently tallying “1.3-billion page views per month.” Make sure to watch the full episode for additional insights. In the below interview, Ohanian offers thoughts on the future of Reddit from his vantage point as a consultant and tells Dixon how Reddit makes money. Past episodes of Founder Stories with such leaders as Fred Wilson, Perry Chen and Lauren Leto are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInKevin Ryan on the Importance of PresentationChris Dixon wraps his Founder Stories interview with Gilt Groupe’s CEO and Founder, Kevin Ryan by discussing the early sales strategy of Gilt – a strategy that was designed to build customer and brand loyalty, but not the bottom line, at least initially. Revisiting the launch period around four years ago, Ryan says, “we were going to make $4,000 for us on a sale and I spent $7,000 on the photo shoot, and you would say that is not a good business model, but what happened was the brands loved it, the customers loved it … and so now we sell $100,000, $200,000, $300,000 …. on a sale.” The benefit was clear. Businesses liked selling excess items online in a classy environment and customers liked buying them at discount. While the idea was gold, Ryan was quick to point out it was probably the least important part of the equation. He goes on to say, the key to success is “execution, and execution is hiring great people, managing them well and moving quickly.” If you missed any part of Dixon’s interview with Ryan make sure to watch the entire clip below, or Part 1 and Part II separately. Prior episodes of Founder Stories including Foursquare, GroupMe, and Tumblr are here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInRyan on the Early Days of DoubleClickFormer DoubleClick CEO, Kevin Ryan led the company through a period of explosive growth in the late ’90’s. He took the ad-targeting company from a handful of employees to more than 2,000 in just 4 years before selling to Google for $3 billion. However, as Ryan discusses in this episode of Founder Stories with Chris Dixon, the dot.com bust threatened to wash it all away. Ryan says during the downturn, “we lost 70% of our clients, bankrupt, and the only thing that saved us is we probably lost 80% of our competitors.” His white collar war story features seven rounds of layoffs.  Make sure to watch this episode as Ryan relates how he rebounded and went on to start AlleyCorp, a network of companies that includes Gilt Groupe, Business Insider, ShopWiki, and 10gen. In the below clip, Ryan dives into the beginnings of one of these AlleyCorp companies, 10gen, which makes the MongoDB database. The first Founder Stories episode with Kevin Ryan can be found here and past episodes of Founder Stories, with founders such as David Karp, Fred Wilson and Christopher Poole can be found here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInGilt CEO Kevin Ryan on The BubbleHeading into TechCrunch Disrupt, New York, we pulled a couple excerpts from Chris Dixon’s freshly shot Founder Stories interview with Gilt Groupe’s CEO & Founder, Kevin Ryan. Ryan, who will be speaking at the conference dismisses talk of the so-called “tech bubble” and dives into the “renaissance” of the New York Tech scene. Responding to a recent “Economist” article which cautions of a tech bust, Ryan, the former DoubleClick CEO says, “They are completely wrong.” Ryan and Dixon break it down above.  (Note that this was filmed before LinkedIn’s blowout IPO  on Thursday). In the below exchange Dixon and Ryan discuss the emergence of the New York Tech scene. Ryan tells Dixon, “I could not be more bullish about what is happening in New York.” Going on to say, “the core fundamentals in New York are fantastic.” Ryan also explains why New York is a pipeline for talent, and why Boston is hardly mentioned in the same breath. Latest headlines delivered to you daily Ever wonder how super angel and man-about-town Chris Sacca spends his Friday nights?  Well, right now you can find him at Turntable.fm, a stealthy, you-can-only-get-in-if-you-know-someone online DJ party.  I just stumbled onto it by accident.  You can only gain entry if you are Facebook friends with someone already inside. As it happens, I knew some people.  Turntable.fm is a project of Seth Goldstein and Billy Chasen, the two guys who brought us Stickybits.  You enter and there are different DJ rooms to choose from.  There are probably 25 people there right now (this is still in private alpha).  But in one room called “Let’s rock old-ish hip-hop,” there was Sacca, Goldstein, YouTube’s Hunter Walk, and Mike Marquez of CODE Advisors.  Sacca was playing “Push It” by Salt-n-Pepa, up on the DJ platform (he gets to wear the space helmet because he has a lot of points, which are awarded to him by other people in the room who like what he plays). Everyone in a room has an avatar and can chat with each other.  You can create your own playliist and get up on the DJ table to battle it out.  People tend to talk a lot of smack.  But it’s fun, and addictive enough that I didn’t leave after 20 seconds.  Turntable.fm needs a lot of fine-tuning (in fact a lot of the chat was about features it coud use, such as better animations for the avatars or different ways to award points. In the end, Turntable.fm is really about hanging out with people and discovering music.  If a DJ is playing a song you like, you can add it to your playlist, buy it on iTunes, findi it on Last.fm, or launch Spotify.  Latest headlines delivered to you daily As Chris Dixon rounds out his interview with Hashable founder, Michael Yavonditte, SXSW serves as a springboard to discuss the power of thinking small, when thinking about launching.  Yavonditte relates Hashable’s experience at SXSW and puts it in perspective. Speaking to the topic, Dixon says, “I have come to kind of believe in the lean startup thing, where you just kind of iterate and you iterate” continuing with, “people put way too much weight in … launching.”  Yavonditte offers similar insights, and notes that building a lean startup does not equate to thinking small.  The two also have a meeting of the minds when it comes to the power of the press.  It is an amplifier for both the good and the bad. Check out the full discussion in the video above. In the final segment, Yavonditte answers Dixon’s “rapid fire” questions. Yavonditte tells Dixon why startups fail and dishes the best piece of advice he has been given. “Hire great people and pay them whatever you have to pay them” he says. Watch Part 1 and Part II of this interview, or prior Founder Stories interviews here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMichael Yavonditte on Going Toe-to-Toe with GoogleIn this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Hashable founder and CEO Michael Yavonditte delves into the conventional (lack of) wisdom, power plays and power players that helped shape paid search as we know it today. Yavonditte, who sold advertising startup Quigo to AOL for $360 million, previously ran business development at AltaVista. Back then, Yavonditte notes “we used to have more queries than anyone else.” Unfortunately it was during a time, as Dixon points out that “the thought was you could not monetize search.” Like most other search engines back then, Yavonditte and company got caught up in the trendy portal wars which turned out to be “a great lesson in failure” says Yavonditte. Dixon and Yavonditte go on to discuss the search monetization void filled by Google, which was built on top of keyword advertising technology created by Idealab founder, Bill Gross. In Yavonditte’s words, it was “one of the best inventions in the history of business.” By the time Yavonditte found himself at Quigo, Google was already cleaning up in online advertising, even with A-list clients like ESPN. But it treated everyone the same. Quigo began to “attack” Google, he says, by creating a marketplace that auctioned off top-tier home pages like ESPN as “a distinct entity” rather than say selling it as just another run of the mill destination about sports. This exclusivity led to higher revenue and to Quigo stealing clients like ESPN and Fox News away from Google. It was quite a soap opera. The drama continues below in part II of Dixon’s interview, where Yavonditte takes us behind the scenes of turning down a $175 million dollar offer to sell Quigo. “That was a very unpopular decision within the company” he says “it infuriated certain people.” His response? “Leadership is not acquiescing to the angry mob.” Yavonditte’s steady hand proved right, eventually selling Quigo to AOL for $360 million shortly before Wall Street imploded.  Even so, it wasn’t easy getting the deal across the finish line. It’s a fascinating conversation—be sure to check it out below. Also make sure to watch  past episodes of Founder Stories, here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMeebo’s Sternberg on Hiring and GrowthLike many start-ups, Meebo has been on a recent hiring spree. In this episode of Founder Stories, CEO Seth Sternberg tells Chris Dixon, “for 12 weeks we had to hire a salesperson a week and if we didn’t we would have missed our revenue numbers later this year.” But it’s not just new salespeople populating Meebo’s workstations. “We started this year at about 130 employees.  I think we are at 175 now, and so for us that is really fast growth” says Sternberg. From CFO to engineer, Sternberg discusses how Meebo weeds out candidates by running them though, “the sim.” This is a simulation of Meebo’s real-world working environment. In our “rapid fire” segment below, Sternberg tells Dixon some of his favorite products, what he would do if he ever left Meebo and discusses his thirst for hitting the road—and air. Make sure to watch Part 1 and Part 2 of this interview, as well as prior episodes of Founder Stories here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInMeebo CEO on Product EvolutionShould founders innovate based upon customer feedback or is it better to develop from within and let consumer adapt. In this episode of Founder Stories with host Chris Dixon, Meebo’s Seth Sternberg discusses his philosophy: “Users tend to be very good at giving you incremental product suggestions.”  But they are not product visionaries. “They may be asking for something that would be revolutionary,” he says, “but they don’t realize they are asking for it.” When receiving such incremental suggestions, Sternberg instinctively skips the baby steps and instead asks the question, “what if we could completely change the game?” Sternberg explains what he means in the video above. In the below clip, Sternberg and Dixon touch on Meebo’s advertising strategy, connecting with consumers and measuring user engagement. Meebo ads have a one percent engagement rate, well above the norm for run-of-the-mill display ads. Make sure to view prior episodes of Founder Stories by clicking here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily FacebookLinkedInSeth Sternberg on Meebo’s Early DaysMeebo, which connects users with their friends across social platforms, emerged from the ashes of an idea Seth Sternberg and his team had for “file sharing between friends that had IM in it.” Those early days of development saw more misses than hits—“kind of depressing” says Sternberg in this episode of Founder Stories. After more than a year of tinkering, Meebo finally found its magic formula and launched in 2005. Right from the get-go they heard from their users, but admittedly didn’t totally grasp the scope of what they created. As Sternberg admits, “a lot of commerce sites were calling, bloggers were calling and we did not get it.” In the above clip, Sternberg explains why. In part II of the interview below, Sternberg and host Chris Dixon discuss the importance of understanding the respective roles of the team—and keyed in on the evolving role of the businessperson. “I was the one who couldn’t code, therefore I was the CEO,” says Sternberg.  “As the businessperson pre-launch I was buying the sandwiches… frankly the businessperson for a start up doesn’t do a lot pre-launch,” he says.  Dixon comments on this thought by saying, “I have seen teams breakup before they got to that point because of that feeling of imbalance.” However, such perceived imbalance can quickly turn into an invaluable asset. As Dixon and Sternberg note, it is the businessperson who can help strike deals and raise money for the team once the engineers actually have something worth selling. Part II of the interview is below. Past episodes of Founder Stories can be found here. Latest headlines delivered to you daily 